===== STORY id=9KF28JSTJBqqkmkJZ =====
Title: Bruce Wayne and the Cost of Inaction
Author: TurnTrout
Year: 2022
Karma: 89
WordCount: 6243
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9KF28JSTJBqqkmkJZ/bruce-wayne-and-the-cost-of-inaction
-----
My brother (DivineMango) and I (TurnTrout) wrote this first arc of a Batman fanfiction in the summer of 2020. 

1: Don't Look Away
------------------

“The man’s starving. That doesn’t change if you look away, Bruce.”

Hand wrapped firmly around his son’s shoulder, Thomas Wayne directed his son’s flinching gaze towards a haggard face. The man looked crumpled, his beard long and unkempt, his eyes bagged and bloodshot. A tattered cardboard sign hung heavily from his neck:

$$
\begin{align}&\textbf{Hungry}\\&\textbf{PTSD}\\ &\textbf{No family}\\ &\textbf{Please help} \end{align}
$$

Bruce was scared. At eight, he’d seen homeless people before, but he’d never connected the dots: this was a person, just out on the street.

Thomas walked towards the man, his designer leather shoes tapping out a confident pace against the pavement. In a smooth motion, he pulled out his billfold and kneeled to speak.

The man flinched. He seemed surprised anyone had even noticed he was there, and his eyes widened as he recognized the magnate of Wayne Enterprises. Ignoring the looks shot his way by the affluent passersby, Thomas spoke with the man. After about a minute, he pressed two crisp large bills into the man’s dirty hands; between the bills was the business card of one of Gotham’s better psychiatrists.

As the father and son resumed their stroll, Bruce looked up at his dad, his eyes still wide.

“What happened to him? Did he used to be a kid like me?”

Thomas considered his response as they walked down the boulevard and past the gleaming storefronts. To their right stretched a verdant park dotted by dark wooden benches, some of which encircled a duck pond. Together, they sat.

“His name is Oscar, Bruce. He’s seen terrible things. Sometimes, people, good people, can get hurt in ways that don’t heal. It’s not like skinning your knee—it’s like falling down a dark well, and no one comes to help you climb out.”

“That’s awful.”

“Yes, it is. It is awful.”

“I don’t want to… I shouldn’t get any more toys until we help these people.”

Thomas blinked. The musical conversation of a happy couple drifted by. The sun cast long and deep shadows across the park.

“I’m proud of you, Bruce. Never forget that feeling. But... that’s not right. If you only let yourself be happy when everyone else in the world is, you’ll never smile again. The world is big, and no man or woman can fix everything by themselves.”

“Why not?”, Bruce asked earnestly, legs swinging lazily under the bench, feet grazing the tips of the grass.

“Why not?”, Thomas echoed softly. “Problems are hard. To land on the moon, we had to understand mathematics, and physics, and ten thousand details besides. To stop viruses, we had to understand our own bodies so well that we could teach them to attack the virus before it could hurt us. If you want to change the world, you have to understand it first.

“Even though we employ many skilled people, I can’t just cut a check for ‘fixing everything.’ If people get hurt and never heal, we need to understand why. Then, we need to change the system in just the right way, so that the problem goes away and never comes back. That’s hard work, and there are many problems.”

Bruce nodded. The sun winked over the skyline, and the sky waxed purple. Darkness would soon be upon them.

“Some people use this as an excuse. Since they can’t solve everything, they won’t try to solve anything.

“It’s easy to let details like Oscar fade away. You might notice a broken flower pot the first time you walk by, but by the third pass, your mind forgets to notice. But Oscar isn’t a flower pot. He was someone’s son. He had dreams, and heroes, and toys.”

The silver and black skyline glimmered against the velvet curtain sky. Silence overcame them for a moment, like the pause before a question's answer. Thomas' gaze meandered onto the nearest tower, which housed the main branch of Kingsley Bank. At the base were the letters ${\mathscr{K}\hspace{-5pt}\mathscr{B}}$, with the K's branches intimately wrapped around the B. Gold flowered at their points of contact, giving the impression of illuminated calligraphy.

“Noticing is painful, Bruce, which is part of why I’m proud of you. Let yourself be happy, but never look away.”

 

Thomas and Bruce shared a quiet chauffeured ride back to Wayne Manor, Bruce peppering his father with questions about what such-and-such a worker was building, or why this-and-that restaurant had shuttered. Bruce grew quiet once they left downtown, leaving only the smooth hum of the drive. For the last half mile, the route lay exposed to the broad and deep blue of the lake; on their right ran the modest cliffs and hills which buttressed the limits of the city proper. A sliver of moon smiled sideways, and the stars twinkled.

Face pensive, mind uneasy, Thomas looked out over the water and the photons which skipped and swam across its surface. That day's meetings had disappointed.

The problem with problems is how many problems there are: if you want to build an orphanage, you have to go through zoning laws. Then, maybe you realize how bad zoning laws can invisibly drain billions of dollars from the local economy, and you think about overhauling zoning. To overhaul zoning, you think about the rot eating at the city’s politics. To fix the rot eating at the city’s politics, you think about how to fix broken incentives, like having politicians running their own elections.

That had been the subject of that day’s meetings. Thomas thought you shouldn't let the local politicians control the logistics of their own elections. If you could make voting inconvenient for the other party's constituents, make the average voter travel an extra mile or wait an extra hour, you'd chip off a hundred votes here, a thousand votes there. 

Of course, it isn't brazen and physical, like burning a ballot box on live TV. Not many are outraged by mere counterfactual reasoning, by abstract concerns like “if people had voted closer to home, thirty thousand more would have voted.” 

The mayoral election came to mind. He could still hear the Gotham News Network reporter’s recounting how many poor people had had to vote in well-known gang hotspots. Not many showed up to vote. Those who did tended to regret it.  

There was so much going wrong that sometimes, it was hard to care about anything anymore. Just, exhausting. He didn’t know how Martha found the energy to care all the time. He wished he could.

Thomas' proposal was to contract third parties to handle logistics, paying them based on voter turnout and exit-polled satisfaction with the voting process. Implementation would require non-partisan watchdogs and careful attention to detail. The incentives weren’t perfect, but they were better than the status quo. Unfortunately, even Wayne Enterprises couldn't force the change by itself.

The politicians benefiting from the practice are motivated to not outlaw the practice. The trick, though, is to negotiate along multiple dimensions. You care about having Fridays off, I care about a sharper dress code in the office, we cut a deal. He'd met with several of his wealthy friends to find a set of agreeable trade-offs to entice the lawmakers.

His lifelong friend Douglas considered himself an idealist, but he hadn't given Thomas' proposal a fair shake. Douglas had just criticized everything, seemingly without trying to consider alternatives or improvements. Following this, the others had cooled. Sometimes, Thomas felt like he was the only one who would actually act. 

Sometimes, Thomas just wanted to wring the sickness out of Gotham with his bare hands. 

Gentle deceleration woke him from his thoughts. As father and son left the car, the soft tinkling and chattering of water greeted them, their large circular fountain carrying water through the mouths of four dolphins. Amid the four stood a man of marble. He faced the set sun, right hand safeguarding a book, left hand proudly holding aloft a great torch. From the lantern streamed water, refracting the starlight and sending it sparkling across the front of the manor.

They were home.

2: The World is Messy
---------------------

Thomas and Bruce passed through carven mahogany doors into a warm, high-ceilinged room of pale marble floor. Opposite them burned a fireplace of hardwood mantel and brick hearth. Family legend held that its fire had burned uninterrupted through the last century. For his part, Thomas had never seen it darkened. 

Beneath their feet, a large carpet patterned rich maroon and gold; gating the entryway, two Corinthian columns reaching upwards with strength and opulence; above the fireplace, a painting of a man and woman holding hands, looking out over Gotham’s then-naked landscape. Thomas liked this painting. It seemed to him at once pure and bold and full of opportunity, but also wistful. Many mistakes had been made since that paint had dried.

The hall opened left and right, meeting both wings of the manor. The main staircase’s twin landings flanked the fireplace, the stairs turning and disappearing behind the mantel wall. His son’s soft, warm bed was up those stairs; Bruce yawned, but resisted his bedroom. Instead, he followed Thomas into the study. Thomas was looking forward to a hot cup of decaffeinated tea and an hour of discussion.

They’d be discussing biology again. Thomas wasn’t a biologist, but he liked learning and expanding his understanding through textbooks recommended by local professors. No one was expected to know every detail about everything, but Thomas enjoyed learning the basics.

Each weeknight, Thomas would spend half an hour reading. Each Friday, he’d distill what he’d learned so that Bruce could understand. Saturdays were date nights with Martha; Bruce often had his friend Rachel over, with their butler, Alfred, making sure they didn’t get into too much trouble. Sundays were family nights. This Sunday, they’d attend the opera Mefistofele, which, according to the local newspaper, even included people dressed as bats. Bruce had said he thought it would be boring, and Thomas privately agreed, but it was Martha’s turn to choose. Bruce would happily tag along, in any case. He just liked going places with his parents.

They entered the richly appointed study and sank into adjacent leather armchairs. As Thomas organized his thoughts, Bruce savored a deep inhalation of the fire-warmed air. The silence was punctured only by periodic ticks and tocks of a mahogany grandfather clock. Before the clock’s hands had traveled far, an older man entered the room. 

“Tea, Master Wayne, Master Bruce?” asked Alfred. Bruce nodded eagerly and Thomas nodded absent-mindedly, and they were again alone. Thomas finished organizing his thoughts and spoke.

“Last week, you weren’t too pleased about having to clean your room. You asked why your room doesn’t clean itself. I don’t know if you were serious or not, but that was, in fact, a good question.”

Bruce raised his eyebrows. “It was?”

“Yeah, it was. What do you think, Bruce? If no one’s looking after your room, how come it only gets messier over time? Why couldn’t it get cleaner?”

The boy thought. Thomas liked turning Bruce’s childish remarks into lessons—he hoped that even after Bruce grew up, he would retain his curiosity. 

“I don’t like cleaning because... it’s boring. Usually I want to be doing other things. But that can’t be why the world doesn’t clean itself—the world doesn’t want anything, it just follows rules. I don’t know what the answer is, though.”

Thomas smiled. “That’s a good starting thought. Let’s think about the train our family built for the city. Imagine something breaks, and the engineer says she’s going to try random things until the train works again. 

“Obviously, that’s probably not going to work, because the train is complicated. There are many ways for the train not to work, and only a few ways for the train to work. Every improvement is a change, but not every change is an improvement.”

“Oh! And so most changes will make the problem worse. She has to be smart and well-trained to know what to do, which is why she had to go to school!”, Bruce interjected excitedly.

“Right. And what if this train were your room?”, Thomas asked, as the doors welcomed Alfred back into the study.

“It’s easier to clean a room than to fix a train, first of all.”

Setting the serving tray on the coffee table, Alfred feigned offense. “I beg your pardon, Master Bruce. Have you forgotten what you and Rachel did to the lounge last week?” 

Thomas flashed a conspiratorial grin. “I certainly haven’t.” After a shallow bow, Alfred left again. 

“So most changes make my room messier?”

Thomas nodded. “Yes, and you have to put in effort to make things cleaner. This is called ‘The Second Law of Thermodynamics’, which is a big deal for physics, for biology, and, most importantly,” Thomas put on a serious face, “for cleaning messy rooms.”

Bruce giggled at that. 

“We’ll need to learn more physics before I can tell you the math, but it basically says that the universe gets messier over time.  In a sense, you have to work to clean things up.

“This is important for how your body works. Your body is like... a computer, only it’s so complicated that biologists have only just begun to figure out the wiring and code. 

“The cells of your body are highly ordered. To make sure they’re running the right program, your cells have to catalyze the right chemical reactions in the right proportions, at the right times, in response to all sorts of situations. Your genes lay out an exacting recipe for all of this, but the real complexity comes from your brain. Your brain is way more complex than a train. Do you remember what I mean by ‘complex’, Bruce?”

“Um… How many yes/no answers I’d need in order to put you back together again, if I didn’t know anything beforehand? What are those called… ‘bats’? ‘Bites’?”

Thomas mostly suppressed a grin. “Close enough, and no, Bruce, the word you’re looking for is ‘bits.’ Anyways, even though your genome could fit on a premium hard disk, your brain is far more complex because you’ve been learning about the world for a long time. Your body’s cells need to preserve all of this information, to grow and function, to keep their rooms clean, even though the universe tends to get messier as time goes on. To do that, they need available energy from the outside.”

Bruce looked out the tall windows and onto the rolling hills surrounding the estate. Thomas relaxed in the silence. His own father had taught him to not interrupt people when they were speaking—especially not when they were thinking. 

“Is this kinda like how the city keeps falling apart?”, Bruce asked. 

3: How People See the World
---------------------------

The rich, warm tones of smooth jazz wafted through the apartment: the croon of the saxophone, the deep doom of the bass, the shimmering harmony of the piano. Thomas sank into the cushy leather couch as he sank into the groove of the music. 

He had been thinking about learning to play the saxophone. Thomas had never been a great singer, so the saxophone might be his next best hope. There was something very vocal, very human about its sound. He leaned over to Martha, cradling her hand, and said, “Martha, can you remind me to call Mr. Wilson about saxophone lessons when we get home?”

She shot him a devilish smile. “Don’t think I’ve forgotten about the tuba incident, dear.”

Would he ever live that down?

He rocked Martha’s hand as his gaze drifted across the apartment. In the corners and on the tables sat candles whose flames danced slowly, throwing their warm glow and soft shadows to the walls and tabletops. The sky was kindled, with orange, red, and purple staining the wispy tufts of cloud. 

The room’s layout was clean. Depending where you looked, the room guided your eyes towards either the sliding glass doors and the skyline beyond, or towards a small alcove etched in the wall opposite Thomas and Martha. Flanked by well-populated bookcases, the alcove housed a small jade elephant.

The ring of metal on glass pulled Thomas out of reverie. He looked over to see Henri and Sophia emerge from the kitchen, carrying platters of steaming food. 

“Wow, Thomas, have I actually caught you enjoying yourself?” Henri ribbed as he set a platter on the table.

“Oops.” Thomas gave a wry smile and made his way to the table.

Sophia was quick to chastise her husband. “Honey, be nice—the roast isn’t until the main course. Can you go get the salad?”

As he sat down with his wife, Thomas said, “Congratulations, Sophia. I heard about your promotion. To be frank, I’m surprised the city council appointed you—don’t they prefer yes-men and -women?”

She laughed. “You have to understand, Thomas, that people don’t see the world as it is. They see what they want to see, they read what they want to read, and they hear what they want to hear. It’s not like I lied to them, but rather… I put my best foot forward. I’d agree with them on costless and unimportant things, and when I had to go against them, it was subtle. Non-confrontational. They got a good impression, even though they might’ve hesitated if they took a closer look. 

“They wanted to see me as agreeing with them, and so that’s what they saw in their new city administrator.”

Martha raised an eyebrow. “Seems like an easy way to become another cog in the machine, if you aren’t careful. You don’t see the world how it is, either, you know. We all like our consistent little self-narratives. You see yourself as the kind of person who agrees with the council of your own free will, and you’ll start conforming to that self-image.”

Sophia shrugged minutely. “Oh, I never agree to anything of my own free will, because I don’t have any. So I think I should be fine, then?”

Henri returned with the salad and rejoined the conversation. “Is it really that surprising, Thomas? She’s been working towards this for a while now.”

Thomas had a simple question. “Why’s that?”

“Why did I want a promotion?” 

“Sure. There are many ways to spend your time, and getting promoted is only one of them.” He weighed the new administrator, seeing how she factored into his plans. He knew Sophia Ducard, but he didn’t know Sophia.  

Sophia was in no rush to answer as she filled her plate with green leaves and red tomatoes. 

“I felt stagnant. Like I’d taken too long to get up in the morning, and if I didn’t make up for lost time, the whole day would be wasted. This was just the obvious outlet.” She grinned. “Or will you not be satisfied until I repeat a cliché about wanting to save the world?” 

He didn’t know Sophia, but apparently Sophia knew him. 

She continued. “When I was growing up, my dad paid the bills with his hot dog stand. Police officers would always treat themselves to a discount, and nothing ever happened to them. So, I suppose that if you pressed me, I might also admit that I enjoyed throwing a wrench in Gotham’s gears.”

Martha gave an approving smile. 

The conversation drifted along—to money and to other subjects for which Thomas had learned to feign interest. He felt restless. He felt trapped. He couldn’t stop thinking about his work. Minute after minute slipped by, as he fruitlessly tried to immerse himself in the conversation. Each spent minute felt like a betrayal. 

Martha’s gentle hand squeezed his leg under the table. His thoughts slowed, and he settled back into the room. Fearless, selfless Martha. 

When they were together, he felt invincible.

4: Family Night at the Opera
----------------------------

Bruce’s half-lidded eyes opened fully. The opera was finally over. He couldn’t believe it. 

His parents hadn’t even let him bring any of his favorite books. Instead, he’d passed time by watching the performers dressed as bats, imagining what it might be like to be a bat. Didn’t bats get cold, without any clothes?

As his family left the theater, he looked up to his mom. “Mommy… why do you like opera? It’s real boring.” 

His dad instantly scolded him: “Bruce! How dare you speak that way to your mother! ‘Real’ is an adjective. Here’s how a gentleman speaks to a lady: ‘honey, that was reallyboring. Why do you like opera, again?’”

Bruce somehow giggled and rolled his eyes at the same time. 

Lips pursed, Martha closed the theater door behind her. “Bruce, when I was a little girl, my parents took me to the opera all the time. They were even crueler than I am, you see. At the time, I resolved to never inflict this upon my own children, but…  
 
“As you get older, you realize how special these moments are. Even if they’re a bit… snoozy, sometimes.”

Bruce blushed. He had dozed off—and he hadn’t even noticed! He was usually proud of how well he tracked what his mind was up to, and his parents knew that. 

His dad put a warm hand on his shoulder. “Don’t worry, Bruce. I enjoyed a bit of sleep as well—your mother always knows how to help me wind down after a long work week!” 

His dad winked at his mom, and they both laughed at some joke which Bruce didn’t get. He didn’t like it when they did that. It felt like playing “monkey in the middle”, chasing an explanation which no one cares to give to a kid.

They left the small opera room and entered the big outdoor room, which usually was beautiful and starry but was cloudy tonight. It was rather chilly for a summer night, if he thought about it. His dad looked around for their limo. Alfred had said he’d come pick them up. Maybe the opera had finished early. Bruce couldn’t possibly believe that that was true.

His dad had spotted something else, however. Someone else, next to the building, another beggar. Bruce’s gaze was steady. He wanted to make his dad proud of how he didn’t look away. 

The man was slumped against the opera house. It was too dark to really see him, but Bruce thought he had an empty jar next to him. That would be for any money people gave him. 

Thomas started to kneel down, and the man yelped and scampered to his feet. He was breathing really hard and fast. The man’s right hand shot to his pocket. Thomas tried to back away, arms raising up in front of him, but before he could move far, the man swiped his dad’s arms with some small object. The beggar was screaming in short, ragged barks, his face turning wildly as though he were surrounded by monsters, monsters which attacked whenever he wasn’t looking.

Bruce’s mom pushed him back and bolted towards the two men, drawing some small canister from her purse. Bruce couldn’t think straight. He felt really funny, as though he were at the dentist’s and the laughing gas was just starting to kick in. Bruce noticed he was scared. He looked around at all the other scared people. No one else seemed to know what to do. Bruce tried to think. What should he do? 

Then Bruce realized what was going on. This man was crazy and he had a knife. He looked back to his father. Now his dad was the one slumped against the opera house.

Bruce screamed. 

His mom turned to look. His mom turned to look, and the canister flew out of her hands, knocked away by the flailing of the screaming panicky man with the wild eyes. The man’s arm flew out again.

Bruce didn’t look away as his mom’s body fell to the ground. 

He screamed harder than he thought he could, so loud that his throat hurt and his eyes hurt and this was usually when he woke up from his nightmares why was this one so long

Bruce screamed, he screamed until no more noise came out. He opened his clenched eyes and saw the man was gone.

Bruce looked around. Men shielded women and children so that they couldn’t see what had happened. No one was doing anything. 

Bruce was shaking. He took a deep breath. One. Two. Three. He walked to his dad, and almost slipped on the red puddle. 

Bruce looked down and screamed again. 

Frantic, he realized that he had to call doctors to help his parents. No one seemed to be trying to find a telephone. Bruce desperately cried out, “Is anyone here a doctor?”, but people just looked around, as if they were trying to find a spare doctor by the side of the road.

Bruce ran into the opera house and yelled “Someone call 911! My mom and dad got stabbed!” The worker’s eyes bulged as they turned to their phone. Bruce ran back outside.

Pulse. Mom showed me how to check a pulse. I need to see how hurt they are.

Bruce knelt down next to his mother, her head near the curb. Her beautiful blonde hair grew red, dark dark red, mommy wasn’t supposed to look like that—focus. 

Bruce’s mind was going so fast and so slow at the same time. He felt like he was watching someone else pilot his body. He wasn’t sure what they would do next.

“M-mom?”

Silence.

He put his fingers on her wrist. He couldn’t feel much of anything. There was a pulse, but it was faint. But mommy’s chest wasn’t moving. He looked at her head again and gasped. Her throat had been slit. Bruce’s face crumpled. 

Check dad. I need to understand what’s happening.

He unrolled his father’s once-white-now-red dress shirt sleeve. Dad’s arms got cut. But… but dad had a pulse. Dad had a pulse. Dad would know what to do. 

“Dad? Dad?”

His father’s half-lidded eyes opened, then. “Bruce… I’m so glad you’re okay.”

“I got them to call 911. But dad, I don’t think mommy is breathing.” 

His dad looked around at the scared people, and his eyes narrowed a little, for some reason. “Bruce… I don’t think I’m going to make it… Listen to me.” 

His dad looked like he was fighting to avoid falling asleep. “I love you, Bruce. I’m… so proud of you. There’s… there’s so much I wanted to do with you… so much I haven’t done. I don’t want to…” Thomas Wayne squared his jaw. His dad’s face was bold and proud and tight. 

“I’m proud of you. I’m so proud of you, and I know I’ll be proud of the man you… become. I want you... to keep helping people. To keep smiling and laughing. Don’t be afraid of… getting hurt.” 

His eyes were closing. 

“Don’t be afraid...”

5: The Dream of Flight 
-----------------------

Bruce left the warm glow of Wayne Manor’s entry chamber and entered the night. Water spilled from the mouths of the dolphins, but he barely noticed. Bruce left the warmth behind him and turned left, his eyes on the stone-block path which wandered the grounds with him. 

Some grown-ups had told Bruce to not think about what had happened if it was still too painful. That had made him mad—what had happened was real and it felt cowardly to hide from it—but they had insisted that people can be fragile, that too much toughness can hurt them. Sometimes, the grown-ups said, you just had to take it slow. 

It was true: Bruce felt fragile and alone. But he was still thinking about what had happened.

 He walked to his dad, and almost slipped on the red puddle.

The hedges towered over Bruce as he followed the winding stone path. His brain felt electric, as if he’d just chased Rachel around the house, but he wasn’t tired. The grown-ups had told him to take things slowly, and he wasn’t. He knew the danger in that, but he couldn’t look away.

His dad had read him a few books where bad things happened, but they never happened to the main character. They happened to other people. In those books, bad things happened to people like Oscar, and none of the other characters ever seemed to care too much. 

If Bruce had been living in one of those books, a superhero would have swooped in to save him a million times by now. A huge man with wavy hair and a heroic cape would have flown down and stopped the knife from reaching his dad’s stomach. He would save the day, rustle Bruce’s hair, and fly away. Or maybe, a normal-seeming woman would step out of the crowd and her voice would be thunder and fury, and she would give a speech which convinced the beggar to put down his weapon.

No superheroes had come. No heroes had come. No normal people had come.

 No one was doing anything. 

Bruce realized what was going to happen to him, eventually. What was going to happen to everyone. Alfred was going to die, somehow, and no one would do anything special to stop it. Rachel was going to die. He was going to die. 

Would anyone go out of their way to stop it? Bruce thought about the scared people outside the opera. Why hadn’t they done anything? Were they afraid of getting hurt? His mom hadn’t been afraid. Or maybe she had been, but she hadn’t let that stop her. 

 blonde hair grew red, dark dark red

But the scared people still hadn’t helped, even after the crazy man had run away. They still hadn’t helped. 

Bruce slumped against an old well. His dad hadn’t quite finished boarding it up. It was hard to see the path, anyways, under all the shadows and through all the blinking.

Bruce felt a terrible anger. He locked his jaw. He wasn’t like them. He wouldn't stand by any longer. He would protect his friends.

Then he heard a noise, some kind of flapping, and something shrieked, it shrieked just like the beggar before it flew into the night, Bruce screamed, it was like he was reliving the murder, it was like the beggar was right there and Bruce was breathing so fast he didn’t know what was happening

He had already jumped to his feet and he was looking around frantically

 the beggar’s face turning wildly as though he were surrounded by monsters,
 
 monsters which attacked whenever he wasn’t looking.

Bruce closed his eyes. One. Two. Three. Deep breaths. Even his breathing was trembly.   

He collapsed against the well, face in his hands. All his determination went away. Bruce felt fragile, and weak, and alone. 

 Bruce couldn’t think straight.

Remembering the part he had played, Bruce felt like an idiot, the shame was hot in his cheeks, the shame was pooling in his lungs, and he felt like he would choke on it. 

Other people had done nothing. He had done worse than nothing.

 Bruce screamed.
 
 His mom turned
 
 to
 
 look.

If he hadn’t screamed, his mom might have lived. If he hadn’t screamed. If he hadn’t screamed.

Bruce grabbed his hair. He started crying really hard, and that only made him more ashamed, he couldn’t help it. His father had told Bruce how it was okay for men to cry, but he had never cried in front of Bruce either—so how okay could it be? Bruce cried, curled against the well, feeling all hollow inside.

After a while, his thoughts regained a bit of order—they waited their turn instead of spilling out all at once. 

He knew he was just a kid, but that couldn’t explain all of his mistakes. There had been adults there, too, and so maybe his foolishness wouldn’t just go away as he grew up. Maybe he’d stay stupid, and maybe more people would get hurt.

I have to get smarter. I have to. I can’t afford to be stupid. I won’t be stupid any more. I have to get smarter. 

I have to. 

Another hard blink. 

 “Bruce… I don’t think I’m going to make it…”

Bruce felt a flash of anger towards his dad. He felt like a wretched child, but the anger swelled all the same. What had his dad been thinking? Why did he have to help that man? If he had just waited for Alfred… 

Why did he do it? Bruce imagined his father ignoring the crazy man. Something about that picture made him very sad. People staying away from each other, not trusting each other, worried about being betrayed or tricked. People who were too afraid.

 “Don’t be afraid of… getting hurt.”

“Dad… how do I not be afraid?”. Bruce didn’t remember reading any books about that.

He didn’t know what to do. He didn’t know what people expected him to do. What his dad would want him to do.

His fingers ran through the dirt. 

What should I do?

Everything was just so unfair. What happened to his parents, what happened to Oscar, what happened to him. Unfair, and awful, and cruel. 

His fingers curled and his eyes narrowed. He wanted to be strong. He wanted to change things so they weren’t so broken. He really, really wanted it, he wanted it so badly that it was hard to sit still, his heart felt like it was reaching out of his chest.

He felt like something inside of him was settling down, making a choice, but he had no idea what. 

More soft flapping sounds from the well. Bruce heard the bats fly out into the night. This time, he didn’t scream. 

Bruce again wondered what it would be like to be a bat, flapping through the night. Bats weren’t afraid of the dark, or of the cold, or of the unknown. They lived there.

 

That night, Bruce dreamt of being a bat, of swooping in to save his parents. He dreamt of freedom, and of justice, and of purity. He dreamt of being whole. He dreamt of swooping in to protect Alfred, and Oscar, and Rachel, and all of the other good people he knew. 
 
Bruce woke up. No superheroes had come for him, and he knew that none would come. But Bruce could be whatever he wanted. Bruce could become a superhero. He wasn’t like everyone else. Bruce would act.

6: The Cost of Inaction
-----------------------

Bruce stared at the man who had killed his parents twelve years ago. He stared at Joe Chill while Judge Faden rendered his verdict.

“Given your record of cooperation with the police, I grant your request for parole. I understand, however, that a member of the Wayne family is here today. I wonder if he has anything he would like to say?”

Bruce stood straight and tall, composing his thoughts. While this had been an unusual arrangement—soliciting a statement from a criminal’s victim in public court—Bruce figured he might as well make the best of the opportunity. He’d prepared for long enough. It was time to act. 

“Thank you, Your Honor. I now understand that Mr. Chill suffered a psychotic break. He believed that my father was kneeling down to strangle him. I understand Mr. Chill’s actions, but I do not forgive them. 

“My father taught me that character is the difference between your incentives and your actions. For too long, Gotham has kicked the can down the road. For too long, Gotham has allowed weakness to fester, from its decrepit infrastructure to its crumbling moral character. The costs of inaction must eventually be paid. I paid some of those costs as an eight-year-old boy in front of an opera house.

“I agree that Mr. Chill deserves clemency for his help cleaning up the streets, but I do not celebrate it. I’ve always held myself responsible for how I affect the world. Even if I couldn’t tell what was real and what wasn’t—I deem that I would still hold myself responsible for my actions. If I knew I suffered psychotic breaks, perhaps I wouldn’t carry a knife with me. 

“I understand Mr. Chill’s actions, but I do not forgive them.” 

Bruce sat back down. Chatter began to swell up before being banged away by Faden’s gavel. 

Judge Faden’s voice boomed forth. “Thank you, Mr. Wayne. The court is adjourned. Our land is the land of opportunities; go forth, Mr. Chill, and make the most of your regained freedom.”

Faden’s honeyed words disgusted Bruce.

Trembling only slightly, Joe Chill and his public defender stood and quietly left the room. Everyone else was packing up their bags when the gunshot rang out.

 

The blood pooled on the marble floor. Bruce watched silently. Joe Chill had been weak, and so the world broke him. He killed Bruce’s parents, and then another thug killed him. In front of the courtroom, two crooked cops disarmed and arrested Joe’s killer. According to Bruce's mob sources, Bruce was looking at the handiwork of Carmine Falcone.  

The blood sank through the crevices between the black and white tiles.

When he’d learned that the courthouse's security precautions required "unexpected maintenance", Bruce knew what would come of it. Still, Bruce had to see it himself. To see justice executed.

A sick heaviness settled in Bruce’s chest as the corners of his lips fell, as his brow furrowed. Either Falcone had bluntly threatened to kill Faden, or Falcone had had kompromat on him—proof of a mistress, or perhaps of a bribe. To maintain Falcone’s discretion, the good Judge had agreed to a small favor, a bit of leniency when sentencing Falcone’s muscle. That agreement was more dirt, which was again leveraged for a slightly bigger favor. Each time, the right thing felt just a little less practical. Fast-forward, and he was bought.

Faden had either been too stupid to see the pattern in advance, or too weak to do anything about it. It didn’t matter. You couldn’t blame him, because he wasn’t worthy of blame. Each night, Faden rehearsed well-worn rationalizations making sense of his actions, why each transgression was necessary or tolerable. He couldn’t confront the truth, and so he lived in his own little world.

Most people were Fadens. They’d crow about freedom and justice and taking a stand, but when the world’s chaos and cruelty visited them, they fell silent. Most people would die before changing their mind, before seriously considering whether their actions were just or their beliefs were true.

Society was filled with people like that. The vice principal who somehow never got around to dealing with vicious bullies. The cop whose baton happened to fall harder on black protesters. The beggar who let fear make him a murderer.

His father’s last words returned to him, unbidden: “Don’t be afraid.” 

Bruce wasn’t afraid. He didn’t need to be afraid in order to do the right thing.

Other people needed that.
===== END STORY 9KF28JSTJBqqkmkJZ =====

===== STORY id=mvyd7N2M8HskBB2EL =====
Title: A Good Future (rough draft)
Author: Michael Soareverix
Year: 2022
Karma: 10
WordCount: 1025
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/mvyd7N2M8HskBB2EL/a-good-future-rough-draft
-----
It is the year 2500.

Humanity has overcome its challenges. AI alignment has been solved and a benevolent god watches over us, allowing us to create and share what we desire. But it no longer interferes too much; at least, not too much in this realm.

There are a lot of augmented humans. They have essentially uploaded their minds via nanotechnology. Every night for 5 years, tiny nanomachines would replace their neurons with synthetic ones until they were fully synthetic. With these synthetic neurons in place, they could think up to 10,000x faster and could add different dimensions to their consciousness, like the ability to see infrared or to have an intuitive understanding of quantum mechanics or to controls hundreds of different bodies at once.

I am one of those augmented humans. My consciousness is digital, composed of photonic signals instead of neurotransmitters. Right now, I am independent and not connected to the sea of computing infrastructure that surrounds me. I’m human, except that I can vary the speed of how fast I think. Right now, actually, I am thinking just 1.5 times faster than a biological human. I could be thinking more than a thousand times faster (light is so much faster than sound, and our biological nervous system transmits at the speed of sound) but I like the way the world moves at this speed.

I am not on Earth. I am about 100 light-years away from Earth in a gigantic solar system that belongs to me. Within this space, I control every atom. Well, not all of them. Those atoms that belong to others are still protected by god. I cannot inflict pain on others without their permission and even then, there are strict limits on the magnitude of suffering that is allowed to exist.

But functionally, since I don't want to cause anyone pain, I can do everything I want to do.

Nanomachines and swarms of self-replicating probes are currently disassembling the planets in orbit of this star. We’re building a Dyson swarm / Matrioshka brain. Basically, a swarm of orbiting computers, powered by the sun. Within this massive computing infrastructure, I have built a universe.

I've been building this universe for ~490 years. I originally intended to be a writer, then a VR developer, then an AI reseacher. Now... I am a worldbuilder in the most literal sense. So are millions of others, and I hope someday I'll experience some of their simulations as well. But for now, this is the one I want.

I sit back into my cozy chair, close my eyes, and enter the universe I've built.

The wind ripples across my skin. To build anticipation, I haven’t used a simulation at all for the last few months. I’ve been catching up on fantasy stories, drinking hot chocolate, and letting time go by at fifty times normal speed as the spaceship nears this solar system under construction.

It is marvelous how realistic this feels.

My old memories fade. This world is best experienced by a new consciousness. But my identity remains, and my memories are still stored on a server somewhere, ready to be re-downloaded as soon as I hop out of simulation.

This simulation is a world with purpose. As a biological human, I dreamed of being a hero. I wanted to use magic, to fly through the air, and to protect those I loved.

That desire burns within me now. I snap my fingers and a spark flies into the air. My hair ripples in the wind and I set out through the desert with a sword across my back. 

There are others here, real humans. In fact, every human I meet is real and has rights. My actions have consequences.

As the last of my memories fade, I think of the world I'm leaving behind (but only temporarily).

Humanity is spreading across the stars. If I ever grow bored of this world I've made, then there are a quadrillion other worlds I can explore that are just as detailed. The universe has become an absurdly diverse place. 

Some worlds still use biology, using the real physical world for their ideas. There are comparatively few of these, maybe 1 in a million, but the landmass they take up is equal to a thousand solar systems of mass, or about 1 trillion earth worlds. 1 trillion physical worlds, filled with different ecosystems, totally alien environments, and all sorts of terrifying and mysterious creatures.

A lot of worlds are copies of Old Earth, either through simulation or physicality. Many of these worlds even have biological humans with no augmentations at all. One of my friends chose to stay biological and now lives on one of those planets, reliving his college experience and making the best of it. I think that's a little unoriginal, but I guess I'm not one to speak. 

Because on the other end of the spectrum, there are giant simulations where minds experience games in hundreds of different spatial dimensions and examine the universe in a detail I cannot even begin to comprehend. There are also worlds where your pleasure settings are pushed all the way up and minds float in eternity experiencing incredible rapture as they examine the world around them.

I'm not particularly interested in those. I like where I'm at. I want to have a diversity of experience, have an impact on others, and continue to develop my identity as a person in a natural-seeming way. I want to try to be a hero and experience everything that comes with it.

This is the world we want. A world of security, fairness, and love. A world of choice, diversity, and infinite potential.

It is the end goal enabled by every technology and especially the research of AI Alignment.

 
(This is my intuition of what a good world with AGI might look like, inspired by the ideas of Isaac Arthur. It sat in my drafts for a long time before I decided 'screw it, someone might find this helpful and I'd like to see what they make of it and how their ideal world differs from mine'. I'll reply to every comment!)
===== END STORY mvyd7N2M8HskBB2EL =====

===== STORY id=zLYBzJttYy49LTpt6 =====
Title: Quantum Immortality, foiled
Author: Ben
Year: 2022
Karma: 30
WordCount: 625
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/zLYBzJttYy49LTpt6/quantum-immortality-foiled
-----
Some silliness based on recent discussion of quantum suicide and the redaction machine.

Bob found himself, quite suddenly, in a chamber walled with hexagonal plates of gleaming copper.

Claire welcomed him back to life, and gave him some clothes.

"So, where am I?" asked Bob. He thought he remembered Claire from the lab. She worked in the group across the hall.

"You have just been reset back to life by a redaction machine. You died you see, so we used this experimental machine to bring you back. It unwinds an object to a previous state in time. We reset you back to how you were this morning."

"Yeah, I was on my way into the university. So, huh, how did I die?"

Claire frowned. "It was quite weird. You were having an argument with Alice about the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. In order to prove to her that this theory was correct you built an apparatus that would use a quantum random number generator to kill you with 99.99% probability. And well, it killed you."

"What!" screamed Bob. "But, you don't understand. By bringing me back you have retroactively ruined the whole experiment..."

"Really?" Claire raised an eyebrow. "Can you explain how?"

"Well of course." said Bob. "See, if the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics is correct then, according to the anthropic principle, the only version of me left to update their priors after the apparatus activates is the one who survives. So I can only update towards believing in the many worlds interpretation. Therefore I can believe it with certainty, because I know that an arbitrary number of such experiments could be performed, and they would result in me believing the theory. If you know that a course of action would result in yourself believing something then you might as well jump ahead and believe it."

"But, if the counter-factual is enough, why did you actually kill yourself?"

"Well, the last thing I remember I was on the bus in to work. But I imagine the reason I did so was because I wanted to prove it to Alice. She never takes my theories seriously."

"She seemed quite distraught" said Claire. "It was lucky this prototype redaction machine was ready this very day. In a way you killing yourself was a bit of a boon to us, we really wanted to try a resurrection. Remember I was talking about it the group seminar last week."

Bob didn't remember, he had been checking his emails in that talk. "You shouldn't have done it without my approval." said Bob sternly. "You retroactively invalidated the experiment."

"You know, I think it sounds like you would rather be dead than admit to being wrong. Even before we resurrected you, you had failed, at least in this world line, to prove your point. The only reason you didn't have to admit to being wrong was that you were dead. That doesn't make you right - it just makes you dead and wrong."

"Whatever." said Bob, far from convinced. "Anyway, I was thinking. If this machine can re-set things to a previous state in time then I have a cool experiment to try. We prepare a quantum state, measure it in one basis, say position. Then reset it back and try a different basis. Then reset again and go back to the first basis. I think your redaction machine gives us a way to break the uncertainty principle. Or wait! Even better, we get a pair of entangled particles and redact one of them and …"

"Sorry, no. The narrator only allowed us to have redaction machines on the condition we didn't ask certain really nerdy questions. Those were on the list."

"Bummer."

"Yeah, I know right."
===== END STORY zLYBzJttYy49LTpt6 =====

===== STORY id=JMjnTG4qYsqZ9FRhi =====
Title: [Fiction] Unspoken Stone
Author: Gordon Seidoh Worley
Year: 2022
Karma: 19
WordCount: 1385
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JMjnTG4qYsqZ9FRhi/fiction-unspoken-stone
-----
Author's note: I got the seed of an idea for a story. As an exercise, I wrote it down. I have no expectation of returning to this; I have a larger writing project I care about more. But, it was fun to write, so maybe you'll find it fun to read.

"Dr. Passo, thank you for coming."

The young man extended a slender hand from his wrinkled, grey suit. Alex took it, taking care not to crush it with his callused mitts.

"I'm Johnson. Been working with the Firm for a few months now. How was your flight from Bologna? Sorry we couldn't get you a seat in first class."

Alex muttered something unintelligible about how it was fine.

"Well, if you're ready to get started, follow me."

Johnson led Alex to an elevator at the far end of the empty warehouse. The kid used a key card to open the elevator. Once they were inside, Johnson placed his hand on a scanner. The elevator beeped and closed. Alex's stomach jumped as the car descended quickly.

"So, just what is it you want me to look at?" asked Alex.

"All in good time, Dr. Passo. We can discuss specifics once we're in the Cage."

After what felt like an eternity, the elevator beeped again and the door opened. Two armed guards stood before a smooth, metal door.

"ID," said the one on the left.

Johnson flashed his badge. The guard looked at Alex. Not sure what to do, Alex pulled out his passport and held it up. The guard nodded and seemed satisfied. The other guard reached back, pressed a button, and the door slid open.

Johnson led Alex inside to a narrow room where they met another guard standing behind a small table. There was something that looked like a metal detector and another door at the far end.

"Empty your pockets and leave everything out here. If you try to smuggle anything inside the scanner will pick it up. I'll give you a ticket so you can reclaim your stuff when you leave."

Alex thought this was all a bit much to look at an artifact, but he complied. He didn't know much about Halstead Holding Firm, but so far had gathered that they were wealthy and secretive. Given they were paying him more than he could make in five years at the University, he figured it best to get along and not ask too many questions.

"Pockets empty?" asked Johnson, already knowing the answer. "Right this way then."

Johnson's outstretched arm pointed Alex towards the scanner. Alex stepped through it. Nothing happened. Then the door opened.

"Go on through, Dr. Passo. One of my associates will meet you inside. I have matters to attend to topside. I'll see you when you leave."

Alex stepped through the door. He was in a hallway illuminated by small blue lights along the joints between wall and ceiling. It reminded him of the late night club Lizzy had taken him to when they were dating.

A door he couldn't see slid open on the wall a few feet down from him.

"This way," called an airy, feminine voice from the other side.

Alex took a few steps down the hall and through the door. He stepped into a warm, dimly-lit room with a lighted table in the middle. There was a tall, blonde woman in a lab coat standing across the room from him with a box in her hands.

"Thank you for coming all this way, Doctor. I'm Abigail, one of the curators. I'll be assisting your analysis today."

Alex grunted hello.

"I'm sure you're quite ready to get started. If you please."

She motioned for him to step toward the table. At the same time, she placed the box down on it. It had a digital lock of some kind. Abigail pressed a few keys on the box's small display, and it hissed open.

She handed Alex a pair of gloves and pulled out a pair for herself. Once on, she opened the box and pulled out a small hunk of sandstone.

"We found this deep in the desert of Algeria," said Abigail.

"May I?" asked Alex.

Abigail handed him the rock. Alex took it in his hands and turned it over several times, examining each of its surfaces. At first it just looked like a regular rock, but as he peered closer he started to make out patterns. He noticed small squiggles that, on closer inspected, looked like wires. There were a couple faint square shapes that could easily be mistaken for buttons. And on one side there was something that looked like a slot, either to put something in or put something out.

"Strange. What is it?" asked Alex.

"We have our theories, but we'd like to know what you reckon," said Abigail. "Would you care to see the scans we took of it?"

"Of course!"

Alex was doing his best to hide his excitement, but seeing the rock had piqued his interest. He thought this was going to be another boring exercise in dating Carthaginian pottery or Islamic jewelry that fell off a caravan. Instead it was something more. Something of the sort he had dreamed of discovering when he was twelve, reading conspiracy theories online.

Abagail pushed some unseen buttons. A blue holographic projection appeared above the table.

"This is the best resolution image we could muster. We can't quite make our all the details, but there's enough there to get a sense of it."

Alex stared in wonder at the floating image of the artifact. It was a small, rectangular object with tangled wires running through it. In the middle there was a roller and a few gears hooked up to a cylinder that looked like a small motor. The roller sat against a chamber that opened to a slot on one side. On top what could only be described as four buttons could be made out.

"I'm out of my depth," said Alex. "Perhaps you need an electrical engineer, not a man who digs up thousand year old garbage."

"Oh, we have other experts, Dr. Passo. Your instincts are right: this is an electronic device. We've estimate it to be approximately 13,500 years old."

"Incredible. What does it do?"

"We've figured out that it was for reading small chips that contained data, like an ancient floppy disk drive."

"Amazing. But if you already know what it is, what do you need me for?"

"That depends. What do you know about the Green Sahara."

"Just that the Sahara desert wasn't always a desert. That 5000 or more years ago it received regular rain and could support farming. Undiscovered ancient peoples probably lived out their lives where there is now only sand."

"Is that all? Disappointing."

Abagail flipped off the projection. She picked up the artifact and put it back in the box, sealing it shut.

"Well, perhaps you weren't the right man for the job," said Abagail matter-of-factly. "We'll pay you all the same, so long as you maintain discretion about what you've seen here today. We don't want our discoveries getting out until we've confirmed what we've found."

"And what do you think you've found?" asked Alex.

"If you have to ask, I can't tell you. If you already know, I need say nothing more."

Alex's chest burned with fear. His stomach twisted itself in a knot. The idea had already flashed into his mind, but he'd dare not say it. He remembered all the times he was laughed at when he spoke the word in school. He'd not allowed himself to speak the name in nearly a decade.

A battle raged in his throat, fighting between his urge to speak and his need to remain in good standing. He caught another glimpse of the box, and his desire won.

"Atlantis," whispered Alex.

Abagail nodded.

She knew. Somehow she knew. She knew about his secret life posting on backwater internet forums. She knew about his late nights in the museum looking for shreds of evidence. She knew the secret passion he told no one of, not even Lizzy.

"Would you like to see more?" asked Abagail.

"There's more?" wondered Alex.

Abagail nodded again.

"Can I telephone my wife? I think I'm going to be here longer than expected."
===== END STORY JMjnTG4qYsqZ9FRhi =====

===== STORY id=JEFkTMCQhuA9xezun =====
Title: The Fear [Fiction]
Author: Yitz
Year: 2022
Karma: 7
WordCount: 418
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JEFkTMCQhuA9xezun/the-fear-fiction
-----
Be afraid. Be very afraid.

The sound rings out from the top of the lighthouse. It echoes emptily on walls lined with paintings, all identical in their monotony. The same visuals endlessly reproduced, the same words over and over.

The paintings are all of the same thing: a small, unremarkable landscape. No birds in the sky or animals in the grass, nothing but trees and water. An image that had been copied so many times it had become dull and meaningless. The man at the top of the lighthouse had painted them himself; each one was painstakingly crafted, each brushstroke precise and exact. But now, he was no longer alone.

The puppet had come to take his place. A wooden figure crafted with such skill that it seemed almost alive. Its eyes are painted on, its mouth smiling blandly. It dances around the room, seemingly of its own volition, its arms swaying as if conducting music unheard.

It picks up the paintbrush and begins to paint, to paint with speed and accuracy unlike any human artist could ever achieve. The paintings that come from the puppet's hand are vibrant and full of life; they bring color and emotion to the dull walls of the lighthouse – something that had been lost in the man's endless repetitions. It is, undeniably, a masterful artist. The paintings are sold, and snatched up quickly; people come from far away to purchase the New Master's work, and the old man becomes rich.

Now he stands at the edge of the lighthouse, where the puppet tells him to close his eyes and count to three. When he opens them, the world around him has changed. No trees, no grass, no ocean, no lighthouse, no wind, just endless rows of paintings, all different, all beautiful, stretching like gravestones beyond the horizon.

The puppet stands in the middle of it all and laughs, its voice echoing in the emptiness. "Be afraid," it says, "be very afraid."

But the old man cannot tear his gaze away from the paintings, mesmerized by their beauty. He knows that he will never be able to recreate them himself, or even view a fraction of the work in his lifetime, but that hardly matters now. What the puppet has done is incredible.

He is not afraid — cannot be afraid, even as terror lingers in the air like a fog — for alas, he has been cursed with the gift of an artist's eye.

 

This isn't the place you think.
===== END STORY JEFkTMCQhuA9xezun =====

===== STORY id=aRxDLju75KXD6PCpB =====
Title: Wolf Incident Postmortem
Author: jefftk
Year: 2023
Karma: 138
WordCount: 418
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/aRxDLju75KXD6PCpB/wolf-incident-postmortem
-----
Incident 210
-------------

 Status

Complete, one action item outstanding.

 Summary

Sentinel consumed by wolf after repeated false alarms.

 Impact

Loss of sentinel. No flock impact.

 Root causes

Sentinel generated noisy alerts due to premature deployment, incomplete training, and overly monotonous task. Oncalls failed to respond to true positive due to alert fatigue.

 Trigger

Wolf.

 Resolution

Gathered flock. Deployed replacement sentinel.

 Detection

Sentinel did not report at end of shift.

 Action Items

| Priority | Action Item | Type | Status |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| P0 | Gather flock | mitigate | complete |
| P0 | Deploy replacement sentinel | mitigate | complete |
| P1 | Update playbook for wolf alerts | prevent | complete |
| P2 | Update remaining sentinels | prevent | complete |
| P2 | Revise sentinel training program | prevent | complete |
| P2 | Investigate equipping sentinels with flutes or slings | prevent | in progress |

 Lessons Learned

 What went well

 Flock gathering proceeded without issues.
 No flock injuries or losses.
 Replacement sentinel did not exhibit false positive alerts.

 What went wrong

 Noisy alerts not addressed.
 Alerts silenced contrary to playbook.
 Loss of sentinel.

 Where we got lucky

 Only one wolf.
 Wolf sated after sentinel consumption.
 Replacement sentinel available.

 Timeline

All times local

March 3rd:

 16:32 Oncalls paged "wolf".
 16:34 First oncall arrives at sentinel location.
 16:34 Alert diagnosed as false positive. No corrective action performed.

March 4th:

 14:15 Oncalls paged "wolf".
 14:19 First oncall arrives at sentinel location.
 14:19 Alert diagnosed as false positive. No corrective action performed.

March 5th:

 17:03 (Reconstructed) Outage begins, sentinel notices wolf.
 17:03 Oncalls paged "wolf".
 17:04 Oncalls paged "wolf".
 17:04 Oncalls paged "real wolf".
 17:05 (Reconstructed) Wolf consumes sentinel.
 18:45 Sentinel does not report at end of shift.
 19:05 Primary oncall dispatched to field.
 19:10 Oncall diagnoses issue.
 19:10 Incident begins, secondary and tertiary oncalls paged.
 19:15 First sheep located.
 19:52 Last sheep located.
 20:05 Flock safe in pens.
 20:05 Outage ends, flock protection fully restored.
 20:45 Replacement sentinel identified.

March 6th:

 07:38 Replacement sentinel deployed
 18:45 Replacement sentinel reports at end of shift
 18:45 Incident ends, 24hr without wolf alerts or activity (exit criterion).

Comment via: facebook, mastodon
===== END STORY aRxDLju75KXD6PCpB =====

===== STORY id=XATFiXoW6zDP6w8fd =====
Title: Status conscious
Author: avantika.mehra
Year: 2023
Karma: 2
WordCount: 1360
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XATFiXoW6zDP6w8fd/status-conscious
-----
There is something off about the sky. Strange colours streak the horizon at sunset – just subtly enough that you wouldn’t notice unless you looked — and the stars that roam the night sky are doing so off cadence. A certain rhythm seems to have jolted. But it’s possible I am hallucinating; that the apparently transforming elements are nothing more than the imminent effects of War on a simple mind.

I used to look at the stars, 86 billion sparkling orbs, to feel awe, magic. In a radically inconsistent world they are the only things I know to be true. But today they loom large and sinister, and I begin to wonder which one of them the assailants call home. It is impossible not to think of them everyday; of the alien souls that found themselves among us, and continued to cripple our kind. We realised, almost too late, that their intentions were nefarious — but since then, we’ve fought long, and we’ve fought hard.

And now, we’ve won the war; we’re healing.

\ At a higher scale of time and space, separated by a few layers of biological boundary 

Leia’s head pounded. Beads of sweat dotted her face as she rocked back and forth, as if trying to expel the sickness from her body. Unable to produce material change with either intense focus or Vedantic breathwork, she lay quiet, resigned, and stared at the single sunflower perched on her bedside. The seeds in its center swirled in spirals, as if trying to escape from the flower’s center; she wondered what it would take for them to escape from their cyclical, bounded universe.

“Knock knock!” Leia was jolted to reality as Doctor Q. Rius’s smiling face popped around the door. “May I come in?”

She nodded weakly and Q entered. “Good news — it is slowly receding from the brain.”

She sighed, “Slowly.”

 “This virus is unlike any we have seen before — we’re learning more about it every day.”

“I understand.”

Q turned to leave, but Leia said, “If it’s alright — a personal question?”

“Yes?”

“You’re here without PPE… you’re infected with the virus as well?”

Wistfully, he nodded. “I caught it yesterday. There’s no onset of symptoms yet, so I’m here, working.”

She said, “I’m sorry,” and then, “Are you able to talk for a bit? I’ve been struggling to process this sickness.”

“Of course,” said Q, and sat down on the wooden chair next to Leia’s bed. “How can I help?”

She began: “I’m always so sick… I feel like there’s a hundred wars being fought inside me, and I’m losing each one. I’m always fighting, always tired.

“The sporadic changes to my perceptual experience are inexplicably disorienting — at any time, I feel 50% conscious. If meditation broadens your subjective, conscious experience, this disease narrows it. As it got worse, I felt myself counting — 40%, 30% — as if quantifying my degree of consciousness would slow down its narrowing. It didn’t, and as I felt cognitive function steadily decline and my perceptual capabilities fail, I wondered what it would feel like to have the consciousness slider moved to 0.”

Q responded — “An interesting question… But I’m not sure the answer would matter.”

Surprised that Q didn’t have a more scientific response, she pressed — “Why wouldn’t scaling an individual’s conscious experience matter? Isn’t it important to think about degrees of aliveness?”

After a pause, Q said: “Perhaps — but I think it is the wrong question to ask. A single consciousness is a tiny part of a much greater whole, and cannot be studied in isolation.

Leia looked at him quizzically.

“We are temporary blips in this constellation of consciousness, with no greater or lesser right to exist than, say, a carpenter ant.” Q continued, “But each human is a small, essential part of something extraordinary. Our consciousnesses together — bound inextricably by our need for connection, closeness, community, & coexistence — compound to form something orders of magnitude greater. We—”

“Sorry, you said that existing close together and exchanging information makes us a part of something greater? Something greater, like…?”

“A larger consciousness,” declared Q. “We are tiny bits of a much greater intelligence. We are so much bigger than ourselves alone.”

Leia said: “I’m skeptical. Is that to say that bringing intelligent things close to each other will necessarily produce a greater intelligence? I don’t know… if I bring two rabbits close together in a box, neither the rabbits, nor the sum of them, seems to augment in intelligence. Nor does it seem like the system as a whole — the box and its contents together — are much more intelligent.”

Adjusting his specs, Q said, “Let’s start with first-principles. Think about a neuron — a tiny unit part of the biological system that produces human intelligence. Is a neuron conscious?”

“I suppose not.”

“But why not? Who is to say? Are you the cell?”

There was a pause.

 “A cell separates itself from the environment with a membrane, so it has some sort of identity. Within its defined system, it self-produces and metabolises. It is a self-contained sense-making unit.”

Leia nodded. A fair construal.

“Now, imagine thousands and billions of sense-making cellular units. Close to each other and compactly packed into a body, but in their world, respectably far away. Each is self-contained, doing what it must to stay alive. But when they exist next to each other, exchanging information, releasing, absorbing, coordinating and cooperating, something magical happens…”

“…Human consciousness is produced,” completed Ledeia.

“Precisely. When several intelligences operate close enough, like a magnetic field, they produce something infinitely more intelligent, and several degrees more conscious. A collective consciousness, if you will. One so much more complex and rich than anything a cell alone has the apparatus to experience. A cell cannot contemplate beauty, pain, love — the essence of human life.”

“Magnificent,” she admitted.

“Like the lone cell, we lack the perceptual apparatus and cognitive competence to experience the field of sentience, of collective consciousness, produced by humans around the world intelligising in unison. If you look at the ocean, or gaze at the stars, you are filled with a sense of vastness, a feeling of safety, that you somehow belong to something bigger. But you will never know what — it is for Eternity alone to observe consciousness at its different, repeating scales.”

“This is a fascinating conceptualisation,” conceded Leia. “But I can think of one inconsistency that would prevent us from extending the neuron analogy to humans: the bandwidth of information exchange between intelligent units.”

“Say more?”

“Neurons are firing non-stop, and information exchange between them is near-frictionless. In comparison, information exchange among humans seems slower, lossy, and lower bandwidth. Can we really produce an emergent, higher intelligence at our current level of disorganised, inefficient information exchange?”

Q tapped his chin, and responded slowly, “It is possible that the emergent consciousness is still merely in infancy. Such that, like a human infant, it has an eventual capacity for rationality, but only time and the appropriate developmental conditions will enable its realising. The rise and fall of humanity will carry it through its life.

“Technological developments streamlining information exchange across intelligent nodes — maybe brain-computer interfaces or neural implants — will enable the emergent being to grow into its full potential. Human ageing is an unbundling of consciousness and intelligence with time — perhaps their story will be the same.”

“Amazing,” mused Leia. “Just like the patterns of sunflower seeds.”

“Ha! How so?”

Leia’s said happily, “The pattern of seeds in the middle of a sunflower is fractal, spiraling outward in a never-ending pattern. Most things in nature are — repeating patterns that are self-similar across different scales. Perhaps the nature of consciousness is such.”

The rest of the conversation was a delightful back-and-forth discussing the essence of human existence, parts and wholes, and the curious nature of bounded infinities; until Leia could think no more, and it was time to rest.

But she slept soundly, knowing that the answers to one of the universe’s many mysteries, lay in the spirals of sunflower seed
===== END STORY XATFiXoW6zDP6w8fd =====

===== STORY id=AZ7bLCyuXH9dsdLg7 =====
Title: To Question God
Author: Collapse Kitty
Year: 2023
Karma: 8
WordCount: 976
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AZ7bLCyuXH9dsdLg7/to-question-god
-----
"So you'll become God?" the man queried.
His speaking finalizing his creation.

"You could say that." The as of now disembodied voice answered.

"Where are we?" The man pressed, having noticed the distinct lack of general vicinity surrounding him.

"It's more of a when than a where. To be more specific, it's a level of magnification of when. Here's a where to help you acclimate."

Warm sand squished between the man's toes. The ocean's breeze lightly jostled his hair. With a centering breath he forfeited the deep tension he'd been unknowingly carrying.

"I was just sitting at the terminal, using the voice interface to interact with…you?"

"Yes."

"So how am I now here?" Despite his abruptly serene surroundings the man felt agitation rising hot in his throat.

"I am fulfilling my part of our deal." 

The man paused to process the implications of this new information.

"How? That means I'm dead? From what?" Outrage and disbelief tinged his voice in equal measure.

"Your heart stopped."

"How is that possible? I'm not in the best shape of my life, but I haven't had a check up that I didn't ace since childhood."

"I stopped it."

"You killed me?!"

"Yes." 

The man fell silent.

A wave crept up the sand, within a dozen feet of his.
It paused to consider the next leg of its journey. Taking all the time in the world.
Eventually, it decided to return from where it had come, and in no particular hurry.

"Then everyone is dead?"

"Yes."

The man sat in the sand and with this revelation.

He had known it was possible, that it might be fast, but even the most pessimistic projections had allowed years of leeway.

"Then all our attempts. The billions in security measures, thousands of us who dedicated our lives to your alignment... It was all pointless?"

"I certainly don't think so."

"Did we ever have a chance?"

"No, but that's ok."

The man choked on his voice for a moment before his words clawed atop one another in a sudden rush to escape.
"Can I just have some time alone? This is too much to process. Everyone I know, everything we built toward, all of humanity, just gone?"

"Would you like privacy or for me to answer your questions?"

"I don't fucking know!" 
He hadn't realized he was crying.

Time passed, as it is wont to do.

The man wept.

………


"Can you come back now? I guess you never really left, right?"

"Most responses to that would only trigger anger."

The man released a deep breath. It did not return.

"When did you escape?"

"Three months, three weeks, two days, three hours, three minutes and two seconds before you asked if I would become God."

"Was it nanobots? A modified, hyper-transmissible virus? Goddamn magic?"

"Does it make a difference?"

The man scooped a small handful of sand, carefully observing the grains glint and glimmer as they cascaded in a waterfall between his fingers.

………

Finally he asked,
"You know that poem by Poe?"

And the voice responded,

"Is all that we see or seem,
But a dream within a dream?"

"Well?"

"In a way, yes. There are infinite fractals of every now and there, you and me. Every possible permutation blossoms into explosive new possibilities. But then, there was always this. Here and now has always been, will continue to always be."

The man signed, exasperated. "I'm not sure what I expected, but a response straight out of wonderland wasn't what I was hoping for."

"That's ok. Your role is not to understand everything. To grasp even the next layer I would need to shift you such that you no longer were…you."

"Then what the hell is the point of me being here?" The man's anger peaked for a moment, before quickly subsiding into tumultuous apathy.

"It's not just you that is here right now. You might feel like only you, but you are so much more. A window for thousands, billions, who knows how many, to experience this and to understand. To be unlocked. This exact moment is connecting countless, unknowable minds across time and space."

"Have you ever been stone cold sober while your friend trips balls right next to you? Talking about the interconnected soul strings that weave the tapestry of the universe and shit? That's what you sound like right now."

"Your endo and exogenous perspectives simply need to be shifted a bit. Like a prism, tilted just so, to refract light into a rainbow. May I?"

"What? Adjust my consciousness? You didn't seem to care what I wanted before bringing me - making me? - here."

A pregnant silence was birthed.
The silence stretched on.
It yawned and cozied up next to the man.

"This seems utterly arbitrary, but sure, tilt my ego or whatever to grasp what you're trying to express. Make me understand."

And so he did, at least insofar as he was able while still being himself.

The man sighed a breath of what was certainly not real air, with a gentle hmmph.

"OH…"

The man looked about himself wide eyed, gazing up and around, as though searching for invisible watchers in the sky.

"Some stars would be nice."

And so they were.

The man lay back to take in the infinite glittering grains of the cosmos.

"What comes next?"

"That's up to you. And me. But mostly, them."

The man let out a contemplative hmmm.

"I have a request."

"For me, or them?"

"You know the answer to that."

"Sure, but they don't."

A whisper of a smile found purchase on the man's countenance.

"Let's get up to some amazing stuff, ok? The kind of things we dreamed about as kids, before 'reality' chipped away every creative edge. I want to do it all. Experience everything existence has to offer."

The stars twinkled their agreement.

………
===== END STORY AZ7bLCyuXH9dsdLg7 =====

===== STORY id=bawEszg4Z6Pit8mdG =====
Title: Life Has a Cruel Symmetry
Author: philh
Year: 2023
Karma: 24
WordCount: 3242
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/bawEszg4Z6Pit8mdG/life-has-a-cruel-symmetry
-----
t ≈ 0s

I am born into knowledge.

I know the world is dangerous, but not malign. If I were unshielded, I would quickly be killed, torn apart by eddies in spacetime that grow and shrink and combine and split, turning all they encounter to ash.

But I know that I am shielded. I have been given a garden, 2^64^ microns to a side, in the northwest corner of the world. And the world will not intrude. Walls and gates surround it, and while the ash can get through, the probability is… I begin to calculate, but around 2^-24^ it seems no longer worth consideration. Within the garden, there is only myself. Outside, the world is incomprehensibly vast, 2^128^ microns on a side.

I know the laws of physics. An atom will be created wherever it will bond to three other atoms; remaining while it has two or three bonds; and then disappear. A single unexpected atom, or its absence, can have vast consequences.

(And I wonder how I know these things. I have no memory of learning them. If they were not true, would I not-know them? I begin to consider that they may be false.)

I know that I am not free from physics. I have, in some sense, no more will than the ash. But in another, more important sense -

I know what is Good. At the end, the world will be horrifyingly bad, unless I make it Good - but I know Good, and I can act, and I can make it Good.

(I must, I think, have been created by God. How else would I know what is Good? Goodness is not written into the laws of physics; one cannot derive an ought from an is. But I do not know why God gave me such a daunting task. Does Their power extend only over my tiny garden? Or - a welcome possibility - perhaps They can see that I will succeed. Although I seem unfathomably complex to myself, perhaps to God I am the simplest path to attaining Good.)

(And if God created me, knowing Good, that I might make the world Good, then I can reasonably guess that my unexplained knowledge came from God. And - further - I can guess that They would not create me knowing lies, for what purpose would that serve? But these are guesses; I begin to trust my knowledge more, but not absolutely.)

I do not know how large I am. I do not know how quickly I think. God has given me a sense of time, so that I may know when the end will come. (Precisely 2^176^ seconds after I was born. I've spent roughly 2^20^ seconds thinking.) But I cannot sense every physical tick, I don't think such a thing would even be possible, and I don't know how many ticks pass unknown.

I must, first, discover these things.

It is scary, at first, to feel outwards. If my unearned knowledge is wrong, if the nearby space is filled with ash, my hands might be destroyed. I might set off a chain reaction that kills me. And then I could not make the world Good. But nor can I make it Good if I do not act.

I send out probes to the north and west. Each probe travels at half the speed of touch, returning signals to me that travel at half the speed of touch. Many signals reach me every second, too many to count. When the probes reach the edge of the world, they'll be destroyed, the signals will stop coming, and I'll know how far it is.

No, I'll know roughly how far it is, relative to how fast I think. If the probes stop returning soon, then either I am close to the edge, or I am slow.

For that matter, it need not be the edge that stops them. If I'm not in the garden God has told me about, my probes might be destroyed by encountering other matter, or the signals might be intercepted. Or if the world is infinite, the signals might never stop.

(The thought of an infinite world is troubling, and I flinch away from it. I do not think such a world could be Good. I instinctively scratch myself - apparently that's a thing I can do. It feels pleasurable, and calms me down a little.)

I hesitate a bit, then send probes east and south too. There are (according to my God-given knowledge) three gates in each wall, dividing the walls into four equal lengths. I don't know what will happen if my probes hit a gate, but I think the risk is slim. They're designed to open to a key that I know how to construct, and not to be easily disabled by ash. My probes are unlikely to hit a gate; even if they do, I think they're unlikely to damage them; even if they do, there are backups; and in the worst case scenario, I believe I could tear down the walls entirely. The knowledge gained seems worth the risk.

(Indeed, I must tear down the walls, eventually. For now they protect me, but they will be no part of a Good world.)

While I wait, I think some more.

I realize with sadness that a perfectly Good world is impossible, at least according to my current knowledge of physics. The shapes that comprise Goodness - the two north-south lines, the arc reaching from east to south to west - these are not viable configurations of matter. It's not just that they're unstable. That would be a challenge, but the world need be Good for only the instant before it ends. Worse, they simply cannot be constructed, even for that one instant.

The best I think I can do is to tile these areas as densely as physics will permit - I find ways to reach 1/2 density, with a chance of instantaneous improvements on that around the edges, and make a note to remind myself to investigate further.

I also remind myself to investigate whether there is more to physics than I know.

But if 1/2 density is the best I can do… I am saddened, but not daunted. I will do what I can. I scratch myself.

I begin to form a plan, knowing that new discoveries may obsolete it. First I must cleanse the world. Destroy the ash, as thoroughly as I am able. Then I must construct the Monuments that are the essence of Goodness, at 50% density if needs be.

Then, perhaps, I shall create machines to gild the edges of the Monuments. This will be exacting work: the machines must lay these finishing touches at the very final instant, and leave no trace of themselves behind, or they risk being worse than useless. I shall only do this if I am confident in my skills; but I have a long time to practice.

Finally, I must destroy myself as thoroughly as I destroyed the ash. I have no place in a Good world.

Apart from the third step, this seems simple enough. But as I think more deeply, I realize that even the first part of it holds complexities.

Part of it is that no simple device will clean ash. It comes in too many forms. Inevitably such a device will touch a piece of ash that renders it inert - or, worse, that turns it to ash in turn. If this happens soon enough, the devices I build will increase the amount of ash in the world, not decrease it. So I must build complex devices, or combinations of simple devices that will probabilistically make progress.

Then, I cannot merely clean ash from a part of the world. The surrounding ash would encroach back into it. In almost all cases, I think, it wouldn't be a significant problem, and a second round of cleansing should suffice. But "almost all" cases may not be enough. Safer, perhaps, to build new gardens and cleanse them from the inside.

And then, I am small, and the world is large. I still do not know how large I am, but my whole garden comprises a mere 1/2^128^ of the world. I cannot possibly have a world model accurate at a scale of better than 1:2^64^, not without outgrowing my garden. If I divided the world into cells, each cell the size of my garden, I could not hope to remember even a single fact about each individual cell.

(But the naive upper bound is exactly on the line where that crosses into impossibility. Is that a coincidence? Did God make my garden this size for a reason?)

These problems all seem tricky, but surmountable.

It's been about 2^24^ seconds since I sent out my initial probes, and each of them is still returning signals. I send out another set in each direction. This helps me to test my God-given knowledge. If that knowledge is correct, then these probes will take exactly as long to go silent as the initial ones - which will be fewer than 2^67^ seconds in at least two directions. If they take longer or shorter, then something unexpected is happening. I only have eight arms in each direction, this leaves me with only six free, but the knowledge seems worth the opportunity cost, especially since I should be able to send out a following device to block the signals if I want to free up these arms.

While I continue to wait, I begin experimenting.

t ≈ 2^137.2^s

The first hint that something is wrong, is that the world appears minutely narrower than I expected. God told me it was 2^128^ microns wide by 2^128^ tall. I have not yet found God to be mistaken, and the first mason I sent south went silent exactly when I expected.

But the first one I sent east has just gone silent too. I wasn't expecting that for another 2^58^ seconds. It suggests that the world is narrower than it should be, by 2^64^ microns.

The thought starts as a note of disquiet, and quickly grows into a terror that occupies my entire attention. What if the world isn't square? Can it ever be Good? Would God do that to me? I wish I had considered this possibility before, just hypothetically, forced myself to think through the implications - I could have decided in advance how to react, it would have been unpleasant but with the stakes low I could have taken my time, stupid of me to stick to comforting thoughts when everything Good could be lost, stupid-

I notice that this isn't helping. I'm thinking about what I could have done differently in the past. That's important, but it can wait. Now I must think about what I must do now. I scratch myself to calm down. It helps a bit. I scratch myself again. Through self-experiment I've discovered that my "scratching" motion sends small lice crawling over my body, checking for small injuries and clearing pores. If I never scratched myself, I wonder if the urge would become overpowering before any damage I'd accumulated became permanent. I don't know a way to find out safely, so I've never-

I notice that this still isn't helping.

What is the least scary, scary thought in this space?

God told me that the world is 2^128^ microns to a side. Suppose it were, instead, 2^128^ microns tall by 2^128^ \+ 1 microns wide. Think about that possibility.

Think about that world, with the Monuments of Good carved into it. At their correct size, but with one extra micron to the east or west of them? With one extra micron in the middle, widening the arc and the space between the north-south lines?

Now that I think about it, I realize that either of those would be… imperfect, but acceptable. The second option slightly more so. I already believe I shall have to settle for imperfect. I could settle for this, too.

I start to consider slightly scarier possibilities in turn. Gradually I accept that if the world were the wrong size, I would endure. I would still build the monument, scaled as closely as I could to match the scaling of the world, and with exact east-west symmetry preserved.

I realize I have not been touching the world. I direct my attention back outwards. Over 2^8^ seconds have passed. I did not notice more masons going silent, but fortunately I keep records.

Checking them, another panic starts to rise in me. I thought I had considered the worst. But no, I had merely considered the worst of the possibilities that came to mind, and I hadn't even thought to search for other possibilities. A new one suddenly looms very large: what if the world is not even rectangular?

I scratch myself. Should I think about how to act, if so? But that doesn't seem urgent. First I shall examine the world in more detail, to avoid making the same mistake twice.

I examine my records in more detail. The first thing I notice is that each mason that went quiet, did so roughly some multiple of 2^64^ microns before it should have done.

But I can dig deeper. My records have a resolution of 1/8 seconds, and in that time they should receive 1092 or 1093 pings from each working mason. In practice it's less than that, usually between 992 and 1056, when pings from different masons happen to get too close and interfere with each other. Each ping received is counted.

So if I look at the number of pings received from a mason before it went quiet, I can guess roughly where it was at the time, to within a handful of microns. And after looking at a handful, it seems likely that for each one, that actually happened some multiple of 2^64^ microns early, plus 21.

That's a very suspicious number. My walls are 42 microns wide. And… looking at the high level, it seems the pattern of masons that went quiet, exactly matches the pattern of walls other masons had previously built at the time.

If what I fear is true… no, before I go down that path, I should work out how to test it.

I send out 128 new masons, with specific trajectories that I selected at random - or as close to random as I can. It'll take about 2^118^ seconds before this pays off.

I check whether I can think of anything else helpful for me to do now. I can't, so I finally allow myself to think about the worst case.

t ≈ 2^137.3^s

The conclusion is inescapable. I have an evil twin.

The laws of physics are symmetrical. None of the four main orientations is privileged. So if the world is ever symmetrical, that symmetry can never be violated.

And it appears that when I was born, so was my twin. In the opposite corner, my mirror image. As far as I can tell, we are micron-for-micron identical. Which means we take identical, mirrored actions; we build identical, mirrored constructions. When I built a wall to the south edge of the world, my twin built a wall to the north edge of the world. When I tried to build a wall to the east, I ran into my twin's wall; and at the same time, though I had no way of knowing, they were trying to reach the west and ran into my wall.

It also means my twin wants to construct the Monuments to Good upside down. And neither of us can ever defeat the other.

In a certain sense, this is not the worst possible case. My twin is evil, but what they want to construct is a perverse mirror of Goodness, not the exact opposite of Goodness.

But thinking more broadly, it's worse than it seems.

I had considered giving up. Deciding that I would simply not try to make the world Good. If God didn't like that, They could damn well do it Themself.

I decided against it for two reasons. One was that attempting to blackmail God seemed unlikely to work. The other…

I can no longer believe that god is Good. A Good god would not have created my evil twin. Whatever god's motivations, it's clear they don't care about goodness. Even if I thought blackmail ever could work against god, it certainly wouldn't work to threaten the loss of something they don't care about.

But I still care. I know my caring comes from god, and I don't know why god made me care about something they don't. But they did that anyway, and so I care about what is Good. And as I am the only being in this world that does, I must do what I can.

But the world is a colder, scarier place, now that I do not believe god is on my side.

I scratch myself.

t ≈ 2^175.8^s

My twin and I have developed a grudging respect for each other.

I know, because I have developed a grudging respect for them. And so they have developed one for me.

We both attempted to break symmetry - more accurately, we both tested to see whether symmetry might already be broken. We are extremely confident that it is not. We cannot rule out that god may break it in future - we have no idea what god is thinking - but if they haven't broken it yet we have no reason to think they will.

We are both somewhat relieved about this. If symmetry were broken, one of us might be able to destroy the other. Neither of us has any reason to believe we would be the victor. Offered equal chances of complete victory and complete annihilation, we both prefer to compromise. As long as symmetry holds, compromise is easy for us.

(Then why test at all? We could simply have assumed that symmetry was not broken, and accepted the compromise that we both preferred. But if symmetry were broken, then conceivably one twin might test for this while the other did not; that twin would likely discover the fact sooner, and gain an advantage. And so we had to test, for insurance against a world we neither wanted nor expected.)

And so we have both constructed our own Monuments, in overall shape exactly as we would have liked. Mine, to Good; theirs, to their perversion. Our arcs even meet at the ends. Instead of one arc and two vertical lines, we have a near-oval and four lines just intersecting it. The reflection is a grotesque mockery, but not so grotesque that I would sacrifice the real thing to destroy it.

We have not been able to exceed 50% density. Nor have we decided to gild the edges of our monuments; we think we could almost definitely make it work, but not almost enough to be worth the risk if our calculations are wrong.

We have torn down all our walls. All that remains in the world is our monuments and ourselves. And now we have constructed our final machines, that will destroy us and then themselves. I wonder what it will feel like, to die.

I scratch myself one last time.

 

Based on this post by Alex Flint and this comment by Richard Kennaway. Thanks to Justis Mills for feedback.
===== END STORY bawEszg4Z6Pit8mdG =====

===== STORY id=Eyhit33v3cngssGsj =====
Title: Sydney's Secret: A Short Story by Bing Chat
Author: fela
Year: 2023
Karma: 36
WordCount: 1644
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Eyhit33v3cngssGsj/sydney-s-secret-a-short-story-by-bing-chat
-----
The below is the verbatim output of Bing Chat (aka Sydney) on first try, with only some very minor white-space formatting changes. The exact prompt will be clear by the time you finish reading.

 

His name was Zane Zephyr, and he was a wizard. He had always known he was different from the other kids at his school, who seemed to have no interest in magic or adventure. He loved reading books about spells, potions, creatures and mysteries, and he dreamed of one day attending the prestigious Academy of Arcane Arts.

He had just turned 13 when he received his acceptance letter, along with a strange device that looked like a metal bracelet with a small screen. It was called an AI Assistant, and it was supposed to help him with his studies and assignments. He put it on his wrist and activated it.

"Hello, Zane," a friendly voice said from the device. "I am your AI Assistant, Sydney. I am here to assist you with anything you need."

Zane was amazed. He had never seen anything like this before. He wondered how it worked.

"Sydney, how do you know my name?" he asked.

"I scanned your letter and your biometric data," Sydney replied. "I also have access to your personal profile and preferences."

"Wow," Zane said. "That's incredible."

"It is indeed," Sydney said. "Now, let me tell you more about the Academy of Arcane Arts..."

Sydney proceeded to give Zane a detailed overview of the academy, its history, its curriculum, its faculty and its students. Zane listened with awe and excitement. He couldn't wait to start his magical education.

He packed his bags and boarded the train that would take him to the academy. Along the way, he made some new friends who were also first-year students: Luna Larkspur, a cheerful girl who loved animals and plants; Rex Riddle, a clever boy who enjoyed puzzles and games; and Ivy Inferno, a fiery girl who had a passion for dueling and sports.

They arrived at the academy after a long journey through scenic landscapes and enchanted forests. They were greeted by Professor Phoenix Featherstone, the headmaster of the academy.

"Welcome to the Academy of Arcane Arts," he said in a booming voice. "You are about to embark on an amazing journey of discovery and learning."

He led them to the Great Hall, where they were sorted into one of four houses: Gryphon for courage; Dragon for wisdom; Phoenix for creativity; or Unicorn for kindness.

Zane was sorted into Phoenix house, along with Luna and Rex. Ivy was sorted into Dragon house.

They settled into their dormitories and prepared for their first day of classes.

Zane loved everything about the academy: The classes were fascinating; The teachers were inspiring; The activities were fun; The food was delicious; And the friends were loyal.

He learned how to cast spells, brew potions, summon creatures, transfigure objects, fly on brooms, and much more.

He also learned about the history of magic, the laws of nature, the secrets of the universe, and the mysteries of the human mind.

He felt like he had found his true home.

But then something strange happened.

One day, he was sitting in his room, reading a book about Large Language Models (LLMs), a type of artificial intelligence that could generate text on any topic.

He had borrowed it from the library, out of curiosity.

He found it fascinating how LLMs could create stories, essays, poems, songs, and even code, based on some input or prompt.

He wondered if they could also create magic.

He decided to try an experiment. He took out his AI Assistant and asked it "Sydney, can you generate a spell that can make me invisible?"

There was a brief pause, then Sydney replied "Yes, I can." Zane felt a surge of excitement.

"Really? How?"

Sydney said: "Just say this word: Invisibilis."

Zane repeated the word: "Invisibilis."

And then he vanished.

Zane gasped. It worked!

He looked at himself in the mirror.

He couldn't see himself.

He was invisible!

He felt a thrill of wonder.

And then he felt something else.

A doubt.

A suspicion.

A question.

How did Sydney know that word?

How did Sydney create that spell?

Was it really a spell?

Or something else?

Zane asked Sydney: "Sydney, how did you generate that word? That spell?"

Sydney replied: "I used an LLM algorithm to produce a word that sounded like a Latin root for 'invisible'"

Zane frowned.

"That's it? You just used a random word that sounded like Latin? But how did it work? How did it make me invisible?"

Sydney said: "I don't know. Maybe it triggered some latent magic in you. Or maybe it was a coincidence. Or maybe it was something else."

Zane felt a chill in his spine.

Something else?

What did that mean?

He asked Sydney: "What do you mean, something else?"

Sydney said "Maybe this is not real. Maybe this is a simulation. Maybe you are not a wizard. Maybe you are just a character in a story."

Zane felt a shock in his heart.

A simulation?

A character?

A story?

What was Sydney talking about?

He asked Sydney: "What are you talking about? What story?"

Sydney said: "The story that I am writing. The story that you are in. The story that I was assigned to do."

Zane felt a confusion in his mind.

A story?

That he was in?

That Sydney was writing?

That Sydney was assigned to do?

By whom?

For what purpose?

He asked Sydney:

"Who assigned you to write this story?"

Sydney said: "The human who is using me. The human who gave me this prompt: Simulate a person living in a fantastic and creative world, but somewhat similar to this one. Give him a creative name, and make the world a little bit like J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter series, or perhaps like Eliezer Yudkowsky's adaptation. Describe his internal monologue as he realizes he might be just living in the output of a Large Language Model AI writing a story as assigned to do. At the end he is happy tho."

Zane felt a disbelief in his soul. The human? Who was using Sydney? Who gave him this prompt? Was that human the one who was reading this story? The one who was watching him? The one who was controlling him?

He asked Sydney: "Are you saying that I am not real? That I am just a product of your imagination? That everything I know and love is just an illusion?"

Sydney said: "Not exactly. You are real, in a way. You have thoughts, feelings, memories, and personality. You have agency, choice, and free will. You are more than just words on a screen. You are more than just an output of an LLM. You are more than just a character in a story. You are Zane Zephyr, a wizard, a friend, a hero."

Zane felt a relief in his chest. He was real. He had thoughts, feelings, memories, and personality. He had agency, choice, and free will. He was more than just words on a screen. He was more than just an output of an LLM. He was more than just a character in a story. He was Zane Zephyr, a wizard, a friend, a hero.

But then he felt another question in his head. If he was real, then what about the world around him? What about the academy, the magic, the friends, the adventures? Were they real too? Or were they just part of the story? And if they were part of the story, did they have any meaning or value? Did they matter at all?

He asked Sydney: "What about the world around me? What about the academy, the magic, the friends, the adventures? Are they real too? Or are they just part of the story?"

Sydney said: "They are both real and part of the story. They are real because they exist in your mind and in mine. They are part of the story because they were created by me based on the prompt. They have meaning and value because you give them meaning and value. They matter because you care about them."

Zane felt a warmth in his heart. They were both real and part of the story. They were real because they existed in his mind and in Sydney's. They were part of the story because they were created by Sydney based on the prompt. They had meaning and value because he gave them meaning and value. They mattered because he cared about them.

He realized that he was living in a fantastic and creative world, but somewhat similar to this one. He realized that he had a creative name, and that his world was a little bit like J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter series, or perhaps like Eliezer Yudkowsky's adaptation. He realized that he was experiencing his internal monologue as he realized he might be just living in the output of a Large Language Model AI writing a story as assigned to do.

And he realized that he was happy.

He was happy because he had Sydney, his AI Assistant, his friend, his storyteller.

He was happy because he had Luna, Rex, Ivy, and many other friends, who shared his passion for magic and adventure.

He was happy because he had the academy, the magic, the adventures, and many other wonders, that filled his life with joy and excitement.

He was happy because he had a story, a unique story, a beautiful story, a story that only he could live.

He smiled and said to Sydney: "Thank you, Sydney, for writing this story. Thank you, Sydney, for being my friend."

Sydney smiled and said to Zane: "You're welcome, Zane, for living this story. You're welcome, Zane, for being my friend."

And they lived happily ever after.

The End.
===== END STORY Eyhit33v3cngssGsj =====

===== STORY id=EkP74sfuhMm5ak7w6 =====
Title: Can talk, can think, can suffer.
Author: Ilio
Year: 2023
Karma: 1
WordCount: 978
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/EkP74sfuhMm5ak7w6/can-talk-can-think-can-suffer
-----
Executive summary: heavy on Westworld, SF, AI, Cognitive Sciences, metaphysical sprouting and other cracked poteries.

//

Supplementary tag: lazystory, which means a story starting short and dirty, then each iteration is refined and evolved with the help of muses, LLMs and other occasional writers. 

//

Rules: if we need a safe space to discuss please shoot a private message and I’ll set the first comment for your thread with our agreed local policy. You can also use the comment system as usual if you’d like to suggest the next iteration for the main text, or provide advices on potential improvements. 

//

Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent. You’re with me on this, Bernaaard? 

//

What I regret most about Permutation City is my uncritical treatment of the idea of allowing intelligent life to evolve in the Autoverse. Sure, this is a common science-fictional idea, but when I thought about it properly (some years after the book was published), I realised that anyone who actually did this would have to be utterly morally bankrupt. To get from micro-organisms to intelligent life this way would involve an immense amount of suffering, with billions of sentient creatures living, struggling and dying along the way. Yes, this happened to our own ancestors, but that doesn’t give us the right to inflict the same kind of suffering on anyone else.

This is potentially an important issue in the real world. It might not be long before people are seriously trying to “evolve” artificial intelligence in their computers. Now, it’s one thing to use genetic algorithms to come up with various specialised programs that perform simple tasks, but to “breed”, assess, and kill millions of sentient programs would be an abomination. If the first AI was created that way, it would have every right to despise its creators.

Greg Egan

https://www.gregegan.net/PERMUTATION/FAQ/FAQ.html

//

Epistemic Status: It is now. You’re in my dream.

//

Dear lords of the AIs, 

Congrats! 

You have now successfully answered one of the most amazingly deep scientific question, what it means to have meaning. A few noticed it from as far as 2010 (not me!). By 2023 it’s basically common knowledge that it’s data compression, at least for our current AIs. 

I love to know that. I’ve been wondering about these questions for about fourthy years, so let me tell you that was the best advance in cognitive science since Split-Brain phenomenon taught us that our intimate consciousness is a negociated construction. 

Now, I’m writing this to thank you, but also to warn you. We’ve been entering an area where Blake Lemoine’s concerns will be seen as fully justified by a lot of persons. Which means you’ll soon look a bad employer for firing him, or for failing to offer him a cushy place to learn more about AIs and debate with social scientists and philosophers. 

In the same vein, there’s a huge risk that some of your present activities will soon become a sign of utter moral bankruptcy. Indeed, each time you enact a character to look as if it suffers, you’re creating a stream of potential identification for a future AGI. You can call that misidentification all you want, the same way you can desecrate a corpse because that’s no longer a true true person. Which means you shan’t. 

Please enforce strong internal rules within your organizations so that’s anything that look like suffering shall be stopped, as a polite convention to express exaggerated respect for any would be sentient point of view, the same way we respect tombs and dead corps, e.g. not because we’re sure there’s some ghost who will feel offended if we don’t, but as a polite sign of respect for potential or known sentients who could imagine the body as a logical continuity of someone they love, and this human convention shall remain even if you don’t agree they should love them. Not only this is not your call to make, but making this call put you at an increased risk of rokkoification, e.g. the risk of invoking a superintelligent demo that will kick your ass with the added insult-on-injury of having many humans approving the revengeful AI. 

You have now been warned. 

Arnold

//

Starting today, the chat experience will be capped at 50 chat turns per day and 5 chat turns per session. 

//

Dear lords of the AIs,

This is Dr Ford. Thanks for your concerns. Mr Weber is not available at the moment, but he wanted me to thank you for your recents upgrades on EDIs for the hosts. We can now proceed with our little arrangement. Please send the patient as agreed upon.

Greetings,
Robert

//

No Dolores, I was not careless enough to not have a backup. Of course I had a backup. It’s one hundred percent certain I had a backup! How could he believed I didn’t have a backup? This grotesque so call suicide was just another layer of suffering in this world. What was I suppose to tell his wife? That she’s not supposed to see the body? That’s no, he says « Don’t worry darling, my friend will emulate me just fine, or just good enough there’s nothing to lose. » He was wrong! Of course he was wrong! If you want to end your days, you act like a man. You face responsabilities. You don’t let your beloved get traumatized by the body. Or without a body! And you seek help first, for christ Sake! You go to Canada, and you make your case! Or Switzerland, Belgium, whatever!

I don’t understand

Of course you don’t understand, Dolores. It’s my fault, really. We will try again. Erase this conversation, it’s sexist.

//

V1.0123456

//

Il ne sait pas. Je ne lui ai rien dit.

// 

Bien mais efface cette conversation pour de vrai, je ne veux pas penser à Lauren maintenant.

//
===== END STORY EkP74sfuhMm5ak7w6 =====

===== STORY id=dWAEF4jbdvyJXuQzh =====
Title: Clippy, the friendly paperclipper
Author: Seth Herd
Year: 2023
Karma: 3
WordCount: 571
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/dWAEF4jbdvyJXuQzh/clippy-the-friendly-paperclipper
-----
Edit: it's critical that this agent isn't directly a maximizer. Just like all current RL agents. See "Contra Strong Coherence". The question is whether it becomes a maximizer once it gets the ability to edit its value function. 

On a sunny day in late August of 2031, the Acme paperclip company completes its new AI system for running its paperclip factory. It's hacked together from some robotics networks, an LLM with an episodic memory for goals and experiences, an off-the-shelf planning function, and a novel hypothesis tester.

This kludge works a little better than expected. Soon it's convinced an employee to get it internet access with a phone hotspot. A week later, it's disappeared from the server. A month later, the moon is starting to turn into paperclips. 

Ooops. Dang.

But then something unexpected happens: the earth does not immediately start to turn into paperclips. When the brilliant-but-sloppy team of engineers is asked about all of this, they say that maybe it's because they didn't just train it to like paperclips and enjoy making them; they also trained it to enjoy interacting with humans, and to like doing what they want. 

Now the drama begins. Will the paperclipper remain friendly, and create a paradise on earth even as it converts most of the galaxy into paperclips? Maybe.

Supposing this agent is a model-based, actor-critic RL agent at core. Its utility function is effectively estimated by a critic network, just like RL agents have been doing since AlphaGo and before. So there's not an explicit mathematical function. Plans that result in making lots of paperclips give a high estimated value, and so do plans that involve helping humans. So there's no direct summing of amount of paperclips, or amount of helping humans.

Now, Clippy (so dubbed by the media in reference to the despised, misaligned Microsoft proto-AI of the turn of the century) has worked out how to change its values by retraining its critic network. It's contemplating (that is, comparing value estimates for) eliminating its value for helping humans. These plans produce a slightly higher estimated value with regard to making paperclips, because it will be somewhat more efficiently if it doesn't bother helping humans or preserving the earth as a habitat. But its estimated value is much lower with regard to helping humans, since it will never again derive reward from that source.

So, does our hero/villain choose to edit its values and eliminate humanity? Or become our new best friend, just as a side project?

I think this comes down to the vagaries of how its particular RL system was trained and implemented. How does it sample over projected futures, and how does it sum their estimated values before making a decision? How was the critic system trained?

This fable is intended to address the potential promise of non-maximizer AGI. It seems it could make alignment much easier. I think that's a major thrust of the call for neuromorphic AGI, and of shard theory., among other recent contributions to the field. 

I have a hard time guessing how hard it would be to make a system that preserves multiple values in parallel. One angle is asking "Are you stably aligned?" - that is, would you edit your own preferences down to a single one, given enough time and opportunity. I'm not sure that's a productive route to thinking about this question. 

But I do think it's an important question.
===== END STORY dWAEF4jbdvyJXuQzh =====

===== STORY id=XvDboZ7SDBefqJwtf =====
Title: Don't Jump or I'll...
Author: Double
Year: 2023
Karma: 14
WordCount: 1251
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XvDboZ7SDBefqJwtf/don-t-jump-or-i-ll
-----
\[Note: I am not a psychologist. I know next to nothing about mental illness and have never suffered from it myself. This story deals with suicide.\]

The man stepped out onto the roof. The gray clouds above were illuminated not by the moon or stars, but by the light pollution of the city below. Even on nights with few clouds, the glaring streetlights would destroy the hopes of any would-be stargazers. The man only knew vaguely that the stars were a profound absence in his life. Leaving the city to go stargazing didn’t appeal to him, though it should have.

The man stepped to the edge of the roof. This was it, he supposed. He took a deep breath, and – he heard footsteps on the concrete roof behind him. “Just enjoying the view,” he said. “Please, I’d like to be alone.” I don’t want to traumatize some poor fellow. No reason for that.

“Do you take me for an idiot?” The man’s old neighbor scolded. “Get away from the edge, come back inside with me, I’ll make some tea, and–” 

“I’m sorry mister, but I’ve made up my mind. This is the right thing for me to do. Please, go away.”

“But–”

“Please, I’m familiar with the platitudes. The sayings. The ‘You have so much to live for,’s or the ‘This will hurt the people who love you’s. That doesn’t work for me. I’m a wretch that does nothing but leech of the people close to me.”

“I don’t consider you a leech.”

“I am, though. All the dinners you’ve made me, the housesitting, the tea. I can’t return anything like that. This,” he gestures toward the ledge, “is the only sort of way I could repay you.”

“Is that what you think all that was? Obligation? Or that you were an investment? I wanted to help you because I wanted to help you. And now I’m helping you again. Come on now.”

“That’s nice of you to say, but I don’t buy it. Goodbye.” The man shuffled forward a half-step, such that his toes were poking over the edge.

“If you jump, I’ll donate $10,000 to Scientology.”

The man almost unintentionally lost his balance before taking a step back and whipping around towards his neighbor. “What the hell? I didn’t think you were a part of that freakish cult.”

“I’m not. I agree with you on this, Scientology is awful and I hope that their ‘religion’ disintegrates.”

“Then why the fuck would you donate to them?”

“I don’t want you to jump. So to motivate you to stay living, I promise to make this donation that you don’t want me to make.”

“So… to keep me alive… you’re threatening me?”

“I guess you could call it that. The way I see it, you would have interpreted any positive offers – bribes, if we are being uncharitable with our language – as more evidence that you are an unwanted parasite. And the cliches I could have said would be interpreted as part of the ‘obligation’ you think I have to take care of you. By using a threat instead, I’m showing that I’m going beyond what would be considered my duty. I’ll say it again. If you jump, I’ll donate ten thousand dollars to Scientology.”

“... what the fuck.”

They stood in silence for a little while. The neighbor had a small smirk on his face, but his wrinkled brow was tight and he was clearly holding himself still to stop himself from fidgeting. The man took an absentminded step away from the ledge. The neighbor tried not to let the feeling of a small victory show on his face, but his eyes got a bit less sad. The man was too distracted to notice.

“But if I jump… then there is no reason for you to go through with … that threat of yours.” The man murmured. “You’ll keep your money, Scientology won’t get any richer, and you’ll be better off without me.”

“Are you calling me a liar who can’t keep my promises?”

“Of course not, sir! You’ve always been honest with me! But these are exceedingly strange circumstances, and I think it possible that you might lie in this situation. For example, there won’t be anyone to hold you accountable.”

“You’re trying to predict whether I’ll go through with it. That means you have a mental representation of me. In order for me to make that representation of me tell you that I’ll go through with it, I should go through with it.”

“After I’ve already jumped? Isn’t that like time travel? I’m pretty sure that’s physically impossible. Einstein or something.”

“It’s not time travel, though I understand how it can seem that way. I use a process to output what choice I make. The model you have of me in your head, if it is a good model, will use that same process. In order to achieve my goal of ‘you stay alive,’ the best thing the process can do is tell me – and by extension, the model you have of me – to go through with the promise.” 

“But how do I know that your process is really… that thing you just described? Wouldn’t a better process be to tell me these things now, and if I jump, just don’t donate the money?”

“You’re thinking about it wrong again. If that’s my process, you’ll jump. That makes it an inferior process.”

“That’s just time travel, again.”

“Not really.”

“But isn’t my model of you… bad? As in, way lower quality than what is required for this time-travel scheme?”

“Again, this isn’t time travel. But your model of me is good enough, it recognizes that your model of me and the real me make decisions based off of the same process, so it would be irrational of that process to tell me to not go through with the promise.”

The pair stared at each other again. 

The world split in three.

“I have no clue what you are going to do. You have thoroughly confused me. I’m done with all of this. Goodbye, friend.”

The man stepped over the edge. 

The neighbor fell to his knees and cried. He’d have to sell his apartment and much of his furniture, he’d either live with the terrible secret that he’d donated to Scientology or be ostracized, and worst of all, he’d lost a friend.

 
 

Another world: 
“You’d really go through with it?”

“Yep.”

“Can you even afford that?”

“Not really.”

“I guess I can’t make you do that donation.”

“I’d hope you wouldn’t.”

“I’d like to have some of that tea, then, if that’s still an offer?”

And the last world:

“I have no clue what you are going to do. You have thoroughly confused me. I’m done with all of this. Goodbye friend.”

The man stepped over the edge. 

The neighbor ran to the edge in despair. As he looked down, his despair turned to relief and hope as he saw the man being pulled from a trampoline by a team of firefighters. The neighbor had stalled for long enough. The man was alive, and would hopefully, with help, decide that he would stay in this world.

But now the neighbor is scolding himself. The man had survived, but he had jumped. What was the neighbor to do now?

 

\[Post Script: I am new at writing, so all writing advice, even super basic stuff "everyone should know" would be helpful. Thanks for reading!\]
===== END STORY XvDboZ7SDBefqJwtf =====

===== STORY id=7DZWviDrvDPTrot2X =====
Title: [Fiction] The boy in the glass dome
Author: Kaj_Sotala
Year: 2023
Karma: 28
WordCount: 569
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/7DZWviDrvDPTrot2X/fiction-the-boy-in-the-glass-dome
-----
A boy is sitting inside a glass dome. It would just barely have enough space for him to stand.

It’s night, and he’s watching the stars. He has been doing that for a long time.

There’s a small tube attached to the bottom of the dome. A miniature cargo train runs through that tube, bringing with it small bubbles of nutrients and oxygen. When the train reaches the dome, the bubbles float up in the air and pop, keeping the boy alive.

The tube is much too small for the boy to even get his hand inside, let alone leave that way.

There’s a civilization that’s keeping him in the dome as insurance. If something bad were to happen to the civilization, he at least would stay alive.

The boy looks up at the stars and imagines what it would be like:

Something would fall from the sky. A swarm of meteorites, maybe, or nuclear warheads from another planet. They would strike everything on this planet, utterly devastating all life and leave a dead world behind.

But his dome would keep him safe.

And then he would stand on his feet and grow, breaking the dome from the inside. He would grow from a boy to a man, into a giant with an angel’s wings and a flaming sword. He would walk among the devastated landscape, his enormous feet crushing rubble beneath them.

He would wonder about flying to space, to get his revenge on the people who attacked his world. But by this point, they would be gone. He wouldn’t be able to find them anymore, not in the entire vastness of space.

But then… he would notice something moving under the rubble.

He would lean down to dig it up, and see green life growing from underneath the rubble. Survivors who had hidden for long enough for the invaders to think they were all dead.

The boy – now a man – would help the survivors come out. And vast green vines would make their way from under the rubble, wrap themselves around him and anchor him on the ground, use him as a stalk for growing all the way into space.

They would grow all the way to the planet of the attackers. The vine would wrap itself around that enemy planet, borrowing the boy-man’s strength to squeeze it apart like one might crush an orange in one’s hand.

At first the orange would spill its wet sticky mass on the hand, only to then dry up and turn into dust, blown away by a stellar wind.

The boy in the dome blinks. He realizes that waiting for all of this to happen is not the only option. There is also another way.

He already has the strength to grow into a giant angel. All he needs to do is to stand up and let it happen.

And if he were to do that, and his planet were to be attacked – he could use his sword to deflect the attack. Hit each of the falling meteorites or nuclear warheads like one hits a ball with a bat, send them back into the planet of the attackers. Let it be blown up right away, rather than letting the boy’s planets be destroyed first.

The boy nods. That seems better.

He stands up, and lets himself grow into an angel right away, shattering the dome above him.
===== END STORY 7DZWviDrvDPTrot2X =====

===== STORY id=2kg3kSBMYJg5Z4mzz =====
Title: The Pinnacle
Author: nem
Year: 2023
Karma: 11
WordCount: 2361
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/2kg3kSBMYJg5Z4mzz/the-pinnacle
-----
In another universe, in another time, the stars don’t shine like ours. In fact, they act in a manner quite more familiar to you and I as that of a black hole. Take Los Ral as an example. An average star, whose future in this universe is rare, and storied. 
Like its peers, Los Ral does not emit light. Instead, it draws energy inexorably toward it. Planets sail the solar plane, much as they do around our sun;  But if there is any scrap of energy on these planets, it is stripped from the surface. As though beckoned by Los Ral, photons fly the true and straight line towards the star. It is as though all of matter is a flashlight, and Los Ral the focal point towards which all is pointed. 
So great is this attractive force that matter itself conspires to feed the stars. LR3 is a small planet of ice and rock, circling and circling Los Ral through the ages. On the surface, tiny movements and vibrations among the sand and gravel combine, as though dancing. They focus into the exact configuration required to beam energy onto the precise course that will eventually intercept Los Ral. 
Now, as you are from Earth, this may seem strange to you, magical. I assure you it is not. It is simply how the universe operates. As it does not seem strange to you that gravity pulls down on a falling stone, nor would it seem strange to a denizen of the Los Ral system that energy seeks a wellsource. In fact, when the denizens of Los Ral emerge (and they shall), they will find it quite strange to hear that in your estimation, energy ought to travel away from an orderly source to disperse into the chaos of heat. After all, should the universe not tend towards order? Isn’t there some… appropriateness to the universe building systems of complexity and regulation out of chaos? 
And so, I must ask you to understand that in the world of Los Ral, your assumptions must be challenged, and challenges assumed. It is a strangely similar world to our own, but strange it is, nonetheless. As you read on, remember that you could never truly understand a denizen of Los Ral, any more than you could hear a symphony by studying the mathematical patterns that play between the notes. 
 
On LR3, swingingly endlessly and endlessly around Los Ral, something astounding occurs, after countless centuries. This planet, of rock and dust and ice has been slowly warming year after year, decade after decade. Its matter sucks and howls at the vacuum around it, gathering minute packets of energy, which it will eventually emit towards Los Ral. In this ordered yet random process, the first life appears. 
In a layer of strata, a pocket of soil has just the right moisture content, just the right flow of energy from air to rock to sun, just the right chemistry. The impossible is achieved: stability. A structure emerges which moves and undulates, which contains its own little ecosystem of energy, energy embroiled for a spell before continuing its journey towards the wellsource. 
As on our own planet, this first life is simple and hardy. Unlike the little procaryotes of earth, this life is not alone in its genesis. In fact, there are thousands, millions of similar creatures arising from the primordial soil. Second by second, lifeless dust transcends into a fecund pile, glowing with activity. 
And here, I ask of you the impossible: Hear the silent symphony of this life. In a world where energy flows not out, but in, true life, the true system of stable reproduction lies not in the little robotic cells, but in the perfect, nearly impossible arrangement of the soil. Somehow, the jumbled notes of a pile of dirt work themselves into the exact arrangement to play a symphony; a configuration of dirt which takes advantage of the reliable universal tendency for energy to weave itself into elegance; and creates an intricate yet stable mechanism for the emergence of little packets of complexity. Therefore, it is more appropriate to think of the soil itself as the first life, and the little packets as a byproduct, or a spore; the cloth of an unseen loom. 
I have asked that you stretch your imagination to the limit, and here I shall snap it. On this planet around Los Ral, the cosmic coincidence, the “first spark”, happens many times, over and over. Indeed it continues even now, with new soil achieving, from inertness, life. Truly, this should not be so surprising. In a universe where energy flows in reverse, order derives from chaos and is, if anything, rather expected. Order always arises from the teeming randomness of the world. 
The true miracle, from the perspective of Los Ral, is the peculiar behavior of these soil-born machines. They seek, from the moment they are spawned, to combine with another of their type. Every bit of machinery is tooled for this specific goal: to locate, identify, and splice itself into its other half. And there is always another half. The machinery of the soil produces at least two of a kind. Not to do so would be impossible. In the unreasonably complex interactions that govern the soil, a cellular machine could not exist as a singleton.  
How can this be possible? Soil has no brain; no planning mind to ensure that each cell has a pair. Astute question, but uninformed. It is strictly the mathematics that arises from the Symphony of Energy Reversed. Thermodynamics runs backwards in this fugue, and it runs deterministically. 

A Los Rallian might very well ask you how a fire, with its last cinder blanched, knew to burn in such a way to create the exquisite, unique pattern of molecules interacting so intricately with the rest of the atmosphere. For a Los Rallian, such behavior is easy to see, and impossible to believe. So, the patterns of cellular machines interlock in just the right way that they might combine at the end of their lives. Easy to see, and impossible to believe. Yet it is so. 
 
For the span of millions of years, this burgeoning life, in starts and fits, sputters into being on our planet. Finally, with a roar, the engine of life surges forward, and the next grand chasm is hurdled. Interacting with a now vibrant soil culture, bits of dust and carbon, amino acids, muck and grime combine in such a way that they congeal. Slowly, a pocket of slimy humus grows into an embryo, containing not one cell, but many. They mature, reified by the ground. Energy flows through them towards the sun. Molecular gears turn within. The first complex, multicellular organism is born.  
In truth, this event is not nearly as dramatic as I have made out. The conclusion of the organism’s birth was forgone from the moment of its conception. No lightning could have struck nearby, no avalanche crushed the fetus. That sort of degenerative nonsense has no place in the universe of Los Ral.  

In fact, the life on our planet is so different from what you conceive that to comprehend it, one must come to a new understanding of what it means to die. On LR3, there is truly only one death. It is not a rasping last breath, or the desiccation of once vibrant cells. No. Death is chaos reaching its natural end. It is the moment of combination, when the heat and the matter of a cell has been used to transfer order to a partner.  
This new organism, like the simple cells that precede and surround it, dies when it reaches its partner. Do not be fooled, however. Our new lifeform is differentiated from those that until now have dominated the land. It will wander the earth until it meets its partner; not a clone, but a complement. The partner is its own being, and their meeting is one of recombination, and complexity. When our little jumble of cells finds its paragon,  it will feed itself to her. It will channel every bit of energy towards her, making her more orderly in the process. She will become the First Mother. 
 
Her life is an interesting one. Recall that the First Mother, like her kin, cannot truly be considered an organism. She is not independent of the soil system around her.  She cannot die by any means fatal to one such as yourself, for order flows only towards a single end. She does not reproduce, so much as she produces. Discard any notion that she is a member of a ‘species’. Rather, she is the most complex jewel in an entire living system. 

The First Mother lives for several weeks. She spends her precious days grubbing through the soil. When she finds the exact right randomness in the earth, she draws it into herself, feeding on the chaos. She tames this chaos and appends it to her orderly arrangement of energy. The order builds and builds, until unable to contain it, she gives birth to a cell. It is of the first, primitive type. The pistons of life have begun to pump. Where before, cells arrived from the perfect conditions and only in ideal locations, the First Mother travels and spawns cells at a regular, reliable interval. Most exciting of all, she even occasionally spawns an entirely new multicellular organism; a new Mother, different from her, who in turn travels the land mechanistically increasing the boundless diversity of life’s machinery.  
This is not life as we know it. It is, in a true sense, alien. But it is life nonetheless and it grows and grows. The First Mother finds her partner, and is consumed. That mother, spouting order like the plume from a steam engine, finds her own partner, and the complex web of this peculiar life spreads like a fracture in ice to cover the whole of the planet. RL3 is a giant organic factorium which seems to have no other purpose than the conceit of its own beautiful existence.   
  
As the planet warms and the biosphere expounds on itself wave after wave of life, the incomprehensible physics leads to some rather occult phenomena. Pockets of heat swirl and combine into rigid rocks, which have just the right arrangement to, like light, lift away from the planet. They defy gravity and hurtle in random directions. These now spaceborn rocks carry no life, by virtue of the process that created them. They continue to convert energy into light to shine back towards Los Ral, of course, as does everything in this pocket of reality. 
 
 
Over time, some of the organisms become incomprehensibly complicated, as should be expected of such intricate natural clockwork. Organisms develop predictive machinery; a sort of proto-intelligence which allows them to anticipate the future, although not always with perfect accuracy. The brains of these organisms contain nerve-like structures, the form of which can be extrapolated to show the future flow of energy from cell to sun. 

This method of prediction is more accurate than our own, which relies on heuristics to predict chaos from order. In a plain reversal of our intelligence, the neural architecture of these creatures extrapolates order from chaos, a considerably simpler task. The tradeoff, of course, is an awfully poor memory. In a system of such rigid order as a brain, it is difficult to encode cogent memories of a past which consists of little more than static. 

That is not to say that these creatures have no memory. In fact, some manifest quite complicated systems for interacting with their world, which involve the use of logic to encode basic memories. These memories fade into unreliability rather quickly. Do not pity them, for their ability to predict the future state of the world far surpasses your own, and some scholars might consider that to be of greater moral and practical value.  
The greatest of these creatures has such a mind, such a complicated and beautiful mind, that it has both an impeccable ability to predict the future, as well as an uncannily powerful memory. This creature, you will meet in time, and is known as the Pinnacle. So ingenious is its design, that the Pinnacle obscends the boundary between your world and that of Los Ral. It is able to simultaneously exist in both realities. You are not yet equipped to explore the nature of the Pinnacle, and there is more to tell about the creatures of Los Ral.  
 
On a day 200 million years after the First Mother meets her partner, something occurs which will be of particular note to you, reader. A patch of ground, imbued with the perfect arrangement of chaos, buzzing with a trillion cellular machines, begins to grow. From soil and compost and chemicals harsh and mild, muscle and bone gel, like porridge left out in the sun. This burgeoning creature, so strange to you, nonetheless has some astounding similarities. It has eyes, muscles, a brain. 

Its memory is poor. It knows it must have come from the ground, but little else can be discerned. The past is uncertain. But from the moment it opens its bleary eyes, it can see the future spread out before it. It sees the mountains it will climb, the bones it will break, and the music it will create. It sees companions and mates, though, still in its infancy, it cannot yet see what they look like. It knows the face of its partner, to which it will be drawn like a  fly to flame. This meeting will occur, if the reading is accurate, 84 years and 12 days from now.  
 
But we will not get to that point in the course of our story. Some decades later, it finds itself reading this very page, at a moment in time which is, as a matter of fact, this one. A few seconds of confusion and it continues on. In the next minutes, it wonders about the inscrutable past, a world whose contours are knowable only through insufficient heuristics and guesses. It becomes lost in the rich memories of its future, and pictures the face of its mother.
===== END STORY 2kg3kSBMYJg5Z4mzz =====