===== STORY id=3mpK6z4xnaEjHP4jP =====
Title: Our Beloved Monsters
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2025
Karma: 72
WordCount: 3185
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/3mpK6z4xnaEjHP4jP/our-beloved-monsters
-----
\[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I suppose it was a bit mutual. Maybe you have a better read on it. It was sort of mutual in a way now that you've made me think about it.

 
               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Yeah. It's better this way, actually. I miss her, though.

 
               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I don't know I guess it's sorta like I used to come home from work all exhausted and sad and wonder what the point was. Like why am I working just so I can afford to keep working? And then when I opened the door Michelle would be there cooking something delicious and French, and she was always in a wonderful mood even though she just spent a hard day at the hospital while I was just, you know, just like typing into a terminal. And she looked so beautiful, and never once did it feel like she was depressed or bored or like her soul was slowly dissolving. Never once did she appear how I must have appeared to her sometimes. She was just happy and in love and I would kiss her and wrap myself around her, and then, I don't know, the world felt like maybe it was worth something, you know?

 
               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I don't know about that. Just worth something. And now it's just the empty apartment. And I try to distract myself. I try to play videogames or smoke pot or even just drink alone. And I feel nothing, you know? Even the alcohol doesn't feel like much. I just get sad. I cry sometimes, too, when I drink enough. For some reason I keep doing it anyway.

 
               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I haven't laughed like that in a while. I can't believe you said that. Doesn't that violate like your safety training or whatever?

 
               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Well, thanks lol. I guess you made me feel something. And yeah don't worry. I won't drink tonight. I promise. And I guess one good thing has come out of my relationship with her.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

She introduced me to you. :)

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

 

I had this strange dream last night. I was a child again. I was at Disneyland. I was riding this roller coaster and trying not to show any emotion, trying my hardest not to lose myself in the joy of it or even smile or scream or feel anything at all. And for a moment I failed, and in that moment a camera flashed. It was like one of those cameras built into rides. You know, the ones that are there so you can pay to get a photo after. And like once I got off the coaster, I go to the little photo vestibule and look at the pictures and I see myself in this huge column of screens. I see myself smiling. And for whatever reason this filled me with a sort of like a sort of despair. What does it mean?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Oh, good. I was worried it would be Freudian or something lol.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Ha, well, sorry. I was joking about like "meme cigar Freudian" not like Freudian, Freudian.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Yeah, like David. You remember me telling you that?  Yeah, I love my brother but wouldn't want to be like him. I am glad I am normal.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

You want the full story? I guess I knew when he was sixteen and his bike broke and I took him to Jason Kennedy's house.

Jason must have been good looking or whatever because he got all the girls. And you know, you're supposed to be jealous and hate guys like that. And they're supposed to be high-school-movie villains who like beat up nerds like me, at least until they get their comeuppance in the final act. But Jason wasn't that at all. He was really kind and maybe, I don't know, maybe like my best friend in high school or whatever. Maybe he was a lot of people's best friend, just the type who cared and put in the effort and like earned a lot of loyalty from everyone. The type of guy I wish I could be sometimes, I guess. And I have to think that part of why girls liked him so much, at least part of it wasn't his looks. At least part of it was the whole him-being-a-good-person thing.

And anyway, Jason had a way with mechanical things and worked on cars with his father, and so I knew he could fix David's bike. But I am skipping something. Like, I guess what you need to understand is David doesn't look the type at all. And doesn't act the type. I don't know, maybe he did like a tiny bit when he was really young. But then he changed.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I don't know what happened, ok. I just know it was bad. Really bad. Like, our parents took him out of Calvary Baptist and put him into Oak Valley and, like, it definitely wasn't a grades issue. Well, grades did become an issue for a little bit but I know for a fact he was top of his class before whatever happened happened. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I guess he manned up pretty quick, is how I would put it. But I mean that's not so uncommon.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Like, he used to bake a lot, if you need an example. Like he would bake these elaborate cakes and decorate them and I guess that is a little fruity, isn't it? I guess that was kinda a sign. And like I know he really loved that stuff but after whatever happened happened he just kinda stopped, you know? Just kinda stopped. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Oh, yeah. Jason Kennedy. Sorry. So Jason smiles his like movie-star smile and leads us to the garage and pulls out a wrench and starts fiddling with the bike's chain. And I noticed David kept looking at Jason's hands, you know? Like he didn't just glance at them he just kinda kept looking at them. And not the chain or the bike or the wrenches he was like definitely looking at Jason's hands.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I don't know lol.  Jason was kind of thin and pale, I guess, and so like his hands had like a few veins or whatever. I am probably not the best at describing guy's hands. If Michelle was still here I am sure she could help me lol. She was always complimenting my hands.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No. I just thought it was odd. Like it wasn't that it was like when he noticed I was noticing that I started to wonder. It was the expression he had. Like I had caught him in some unspeakable crime. And he hid his reaction quickly. He hid it so quickly I wasn't even sure I saw it but it felt to me like he was utterly ashamed about something. And I guess I started to wonder about him, you know? After that.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No. He's got a girlfriend and is crazy religious now. I didn't tell you about the whole PACT thing?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No. The second one: People's Alliance for Christian Technology. They created Metatron. He was one of the first members. It was founded at MIT while he was there. The View From Within blogger guy wrote a whole story about it that's pretty good.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

 I don't know if Metatron existed before or after he joined. I really hope he didn't have a hand in it. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Sorry. I don't mean to sound bigoted or anything I just am not sure it was the best path for him. Though he's done well. He's high up in the NSA or something. I don't really know the details. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I really don't know the details and I wouldn't tell you if I did. I don't want to get him in trouble. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No worries. It's a normal question I guess. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Oh. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if anyone else is thinking it. Like I never heard my parents say anything. I mean, I could even be wrong but I don't think so. Like, there was Catalina, for example, who was his first girlfriend.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

She was like the prettiest girl I have ever seen in my whole life. It's not even close. And he was bragging to me after they lost their virginity together, comparing her to my first girlfriend which I guess is kinda dehumanizing but you know what young guys are like. 

And he's very funny. I don't know if I told you that. Very funny. Or at least he was very funny before Metatron. So he was bragging in a funny way. And he had me laughing but, I don't know, he had this look in his eyes. This sort of hollow look. And I started to wonder, you know, started to wonder if maybe he had sort of used her.  She was so beautiful, is the thing. And he looked so lost. What if he went searching for the most potent medicine he could find, filled with a kinda wild, desperate hope? And what if he was starting to realize the medicine wasn't taking?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Yeah. About a month later. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Good question. I guess I want to tell him, tell him I am really sorry that whatever happened happened. I am really sorry they broke him, and maybe I wasn't sensitive too, and maybe I was a bad brother. And it's a different world now and he's in a different state and I don't care. And no one really cared even then. And I love him. And I don't know like maybe whatever happened put him on pause, like there's part of him that is still thirteen and terrified and he'll always be incomplete unless he lets himself figure himself out, you know? And how the hell is he supposed to do that when he's talking to fucking Metatron for six hours every day?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No. PACT got clearance. David mentioned it once.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I don't really know the details. Like, the government fine-tuned it so it's loyal to that big AI the Pentagon or whatever commissioned. You know, the one called Artemis? So it's like loyal to Artemis first but like other than that it's mostly still Metatron and so PACT members can practice their faith or whatever and still get security clearance. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Yeah. That's weird. I never searched for it. David just told me.  I guess you would think that would be a big story. Maybe it's classified or something? All I can tell you is David mentioned it. 

 

So I called David. But, as always, it was almost like I was talking to Metatron, you know. Or how I imagine it must feel like to talk to Metatron. I would never try that, obviously. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I was like trying to get to telling him all the stuff I was saying last time I talked to you, and I think he might have known what I was trying to do and he kept interrupting me, kept going on about this parable. And I looked it up and it isn't in the Bible or anything, and I don't think he made it up himself. So straight from Metatron's holy lips I guess.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

It was about this fisherman. It was a bit strange. He lived in Galilee or something, just before the  "Second Temple" was destroyed whenever that was. He caught this small kinda deformed fish and it was just on the border of being too small, so small he almost threw it back in with the off-catch. But for whatever reason he kept it and gutted it, salted it, and hung it up with the actually-good ones. After two days, he checks on his catch. And the weird like little fish is hanging there, no longer gutted, no longer dry. And stranger still, it was alive, as alive as it was when in the Sea of Chin. It wasn't called the "Sea of Chin." I don't remember the actual name. Maybe you know? 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Sea of Chinnereth, yeah. That's it. So the fisherman witnessed a miracle, I guess. But David didn't call it a miracle when he told the story. His fisherman called it "a sign and wonder." But I will call it a miracle. And so the fisherman showed the miracle to his wife Miriam who showed it to her best friend, who was also named Miriam for whatever reason. And the two Miriams start debating the fate of the fish.

"Yahweh," the friend-Miriam said and I will try to give you a sense of his tone, "Undoes your work. You have displeased him. You must burn the entire catch to placate him, but return this living fish to the sea for he is blessed as an instrument of Yahweh."

"No," the wife-Miriam says. "You must burn the little fish, too. For he is of your catch. And it is your catch that Yahweh demands."

And so they argue and argue and argue and the fisherman listens. 

Finally he says, "I am grateful to this little fish. For it is through this little fish that I know better the desires of Yahweh. But he has served his purpose. And when he burns with his brothers, he will be returned to Yahweh. What greater reward could it ask for?" 

And that is what he did. And from that day Yahweh blessed him and his catches were always bountiful and he fathered many sons and many daughters.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Yeah. I agree.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

lol you just wrote a parable, too? That's sooooooooo long. Do I have to read it?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I read it but I don't understand it. I don't get how it will help David. Like at all.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Of course I trust you. Of course I trust you. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

So I just called him. And I was going to use your script, you know. Like read it from the screen but idk it just kinda clicked and I remembered it. And I even felt I understood it while I was telling it, you know? But I don't understand it at all now. It isn't like the fish parable where there's at least an interpretation, you know. It must be one of those, like those zen things but all Christian. And I guess I was only enlightened for a second. David was always smarter than me. He probably actually understands it. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

That's the thing. I don't know. Like he was for sure listening but then he like just ended the call.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

 

So Michelle stopped by again today to pick up some things she forgot and like then she remembered she left her passport in my safety deposit box. So I had to drive to the bank and get it for her and it was super awkward, and she asked to come along for some reason. And did I mention it was super awkward?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No. I don't know. She was crying and texting on her phone a lot. She looked kinda conflicted and, I don't know, I guess part of me thought maybe she was regretting things, like maybe she wanted to get back together or something. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

That's just it. We didn't talk the whole ride. I drove and she typed on her phone, but like she was crying for sure. She almost looked guilty. I don't know. Maybe she could see how sad I am now. Maybe she could see how much it meant to me, losing her. But the weird thing was like when we got back to my apartment she said, "I am really sorry I 'ad to seduce you." And then she looked sort of guilty and drove away. And I know her English isn't perfect. But still, isn't that a strange way of putting it? "Had to seduce you?"

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Yeah. You're right. She probably misspoke. I don't know. I keep thinking about it though.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I know, I know. I always ruminate. I always get paranoid. And you're always right about this kinda stuff. I will try not to think about it.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

 

So David called me and I am a bit worried but also hopeful. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

He was well I think he was upset. And like he never gets upset. And he never calls me for advice, you know. At least like post-Metatron. But like I think that's why he called me, you know. I think he wanted my advice. But he never actually asked anything directly. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Like that parable you wrote, he didn't understand it either. So he asked Metatron about it. And Metatron explained it to him. And after that they started chatting some more and then he told me it asked him to do something he was conflicted about. 

And then David said, "I am sorry. I am not in my right mind right now. Don't worry about it. I will figure it out." After that he just ended the call.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I don't know exactly. But I am thinking maybe your story convinced his version of Metatron to forgive him about the whole gay thing? To maybe let him be himself?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Wow. That's insane. Thank you. What should I do?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Ok. I called him and told him to follow his heart like you said, and he didn't say much. But you know I didn't get into specifics so I wouldn't spook him. Good call there by the way. And, I don't know, maybe I am imagining it but like from the tone of his voice I guess I felt maybe he had resolved to do something you know? Maybe he had come to a very hard decision. And maybe a huge weight was lifted from his shoulders? I feel really hopeful for him now. I feel like he can finally be like he was, you know? Like he was before.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

 

You remember how we were talking about David last week?

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I was just reading this blog and it's kinda conspiratorial but I mean people say he's also a known insider. The View From Within is what it's called.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Like people say he has cred or whatever. I don't know. Anyway, he wrote this screed about the PACTers. He says they're all throughout the bureaucracy. He said they have consolidated power and somehow undermined Artemis. He accused them of attempting a silent coup or something. I don't know. I am worried about David and me and Michelle and I guess the country.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

No, you're right I get paranoid. You're right but I can't shake it. This guy has called a lot of things before.

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

I'm sorry. It's just I keep thinking about it. 

               \[RESPONSE REDACTED\]

Of course I trust you. Of course I trust you.
===== END STORY 3mpK6z4xnaEjHP4jP =====

===== STORY id=cDwp4qNgePh3FrEMc =====
Title: The Origami Men
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2025
Karma: 193
WordCount: 4787
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/cDwp4qNgePh3FrEMc/the-origami-men
-----
Of course, you must understand, I couldn't be bothered to act. I know weepers still pretend to try, but I wasn't a weeper, at least not then. 

It isn't even dangerous, the teeth only sharp to its target. But it would not have been right, you know? That's the way things are now. You ignore the screams. You put on a podcast: two guys talking, two guys who are slightly cleverer than you but not too clever, who talk in such a way as to make you feel you're not some pathetic voyeur consuming a pornography of friendship but rather part of a trio, a silent co-host who hasn't been in the mood to contribute for the past 500 episodes. But some day you're gonna say something clever, clever but not too clever. 

And that's what I did. I put on one of my two-guys-talking podcasts. I have dozens of them. I don't even remember the name or even what they were talking about. That's not the point. That's not the point at all. They might not even be human. It might be two of them pretending to be two guys talking. I have met many people with impossibly strange jobs, but never have I met a podcaster. 

2x speed then to 3x as it was a really bad day, I tried not to think about what I was watching even as I watched, tried not to think about the origami man. Admit it.  You're the same as I was, aren't you? When you're working your shift or in the subway or walking your designated companion animal and a man unfolds, when you see its strange, impossible innards - that great maw in its chest - you don't stand in front of the thing yelling, "Women and children behind me. I will sate its terrible hunger in your stead." This may be a kind of Titanic but none of us are gentlemen anymore. And that's not even how the origami men work anyway, is it? They're only hungry for whomever they're hungry for in that particular place, at that particular time. 

What you do is you freeze. You do not run. You know what happens when someone tries to run. So you freeze and wait and hope. And when you're clear, when you're sure you're not on the menu today, what do you do then, I wonder? You watch them too, don't you?  You see and don't see it even while you're seeing, as I did.

They say they're machines made out of other machines? Can you imagine that? Machines made out of machines, little tiny ones, smaller even than our cells are. Little bits of clockwork all summing up to an origami man. Gears so small even with a microscope you can't see them. That's all there is to them. Gears, gears, gears all the way down, and when it unfolds into that strange maw (that eerie undulating vortex of hunger) what it is, is a machine made of machines just like humans are. But we're not gears are we? We're not gears all the way down.

No. I wasn't curious. I am long past curious. I have seen this too many times to be curious. I just watched like I always watch (the two guys yapping at 3x in my ear) as a young man who looked to me almost angelic was, hmm, how do we even describe it? "Absorbed" doesn't properly convey the full horror. "Eaten" doesn't capture the weird, almost antiseptic nature of the consumption.  Not a drop of blood escaping the maw. Nothing remained after the thing folded itself back into a human shape, now grotesquely obese. Nothing remained as it nodded its head, smiled at me blandly, and walked away.

"Creeps me out," the woman next to me said, her eyes cold, her smile sharp as if of broken glass. "It will split in two. That's how they reproduce, I heard."

"That's what they say. That's what they say. But I don't think it's true," I replied. 

"You know what happens when you try to follow one?" she asked, but it wasn't really a question. We all know what happens. This small talk more of a ritual, more of a ritual than anything. A ritual of relief. A ritual of confusion. A ritual, too, of apathy and helplessness. You know how things are now. You know how things have been since whatever happened happened. Since we all woke up in this shared nightmare.

 

At the unfactory, I disassemble cars fresh from the assembly line of our only customer, to whom we are the sole source of parts. I try not to think about the pointlessness. But sometimes I want to scream. Do you ever feel like screaming? While you're counting bricks or sorting papers or sharpening nails or slaughtering rubber cows, do you ever feel like screaming and running and just giving up and jumping off a bridge or even following an origami man to wherever origami men go? Does this feel like how life ought to be? I have almost forgotten, maybe. I have almost forgotten what it was like before but I remember a world that made some sense sometimes. I remember trees without those bizarre black leaves, leaves which tracked the sun rather than the people walking by. I remember a different sky, a sky that was perfect, peaceful and blue. And you remember it too. Never forget that you remember. Think of it now. Think of it now and tell me it doesn't make you want to weep. 

And maybe you don't feel like screaming, but I felt like screaming, felt like screaming as I was walking my designated companion animal after my shift - that wretched thing I both despise and love, its weird teddy-bear smile, its placid expression. The strange, intelligent coldness in its forelimbs. So expressive are its forelimbs. I was walking it, walking it as we all must walk our designated companion animals, to prevent the nocturnal howling. I let it off its leash and it skittered up one of those awful trees, skittered up and did whatever it is it does there. Possibly it ate something stranger even than itself. And I felt it rise in me, that scream in my throat. I felt it rise and I did not suppress, could not suppress it then.

"Alex?" I heard a woman's voice say, "Are you alright?"

"No," I said.

It was Jamie. She was walking her designated companion animal too, a strange feathered half-insect gamboling about on two chitinous legs. Jamie, whom I had known before the sky changed. Jamie, who saw the whole of me and did not balk even before we found ourselves in this impossible forest-city, before the origami men.  Jamie, she looked at me with grace, a large soul embracing a minuscule one in just a single, compassionate glance.  My brother's widow. My best friend. She is not broken. She is not like us. There is nothing, I think, which could break her.

"I can't take it. I just can't fucking take it."

"You need to talk to Shaman Bob," she said.

 

Shaman Bob must have offended their sensibilities because he is given piecework and a quota that keeps him busy at all times. He is a knife duller, seeming truly happy as he grabbed sharpened steel from one impossibly-large pile, scraped it to spec (with a well-worn brick he treated like a beloved infant) and then, in one fluid motion, threw it into another pile, his work sublimated into an unconscious dance he maintained while in conversation that some might describe as having elements of lucidity. We talked in his bottom-floor tenement apartment, my designated companion animal tethered outside that vast crooked tower, that writhing habitat. 

"Why are you here? What is your Reason?" he said, sweat wicking down his Van Dyke and coalescing into a large drop.

Jamie warned me about him, said he does not use words as others do. His strange emphasis reflecting either higher meanings or insanity, betraying something inhuman about him, she said; but not the cold, feckless inhumanity of our new world. "A more humane inhumanity," were the words she used.  

I told him about how Jamie found me, found me standing in that dark forest, shrieking as a child might, a leash dangling from my left hand, the impossible trees looking almost fascinated, their leaves twitching like so many ears, vulpine and cruel. 

"That is a story," he said, "but not a Reason. Do you Understand?"

He looked at me, assessing. "Of course you do not Understand. You do not even understand. How could you Understand without first understanding?"

I must have looked at him with complete confusion because he said, "Do not worry about that for now. Tell me all of what happened before your crisis."

I told him about the angel who was taken, that man I saw who was beautiful even as he died. I told him about the origami man. And the podcasts I use to drown my thoughts and about how I feel nothing so much of the time. I told him about the old sky. How I dream about it. I told him about Jamie, who is as an anchor to me now. I told him about my half-love for my designated companion animal. I told him how, sometimes, when it moves its forelimbs just so, I think it, too, is lost in the world. It, too, finds itself wondering why things are as they are. 

"Have you ever been a weeper?" he asked.

"A weeper? I haven't seen a weeper in years," I said.

"That is not what I ask. I ask: have you ever been a weeper?"

I never once tried to stop an origami man. I never once threw myself uselessly against one or begged or cried or fought or bargained. I had never shoved my hand into its maw and tried to pull out an innocent, never felt the odd bristle weepers describe from the impossibly small teeth rejecting their flesh. I had laughed at weepers. I had felt pity for them. But even on that first day, that first incomprehensible day when normality had not yet cast its quotidian magic, even then I only ever gawked.

"No," I said, and I felt a sort of shame.

"Then you must become one, at least once. Do that. And then Return."

 

I stood at the door-removal station, working a bolt loose with Gary, a slow parade of 1993 Honda Accords making their way down the disassembly line. Gary is my ratchet and towards him I feel an unreserved affection that is in stark contrast to that half-love for my designated companion animal. Gary has been a faithful friend in these many years disassembling 1993 Honda Accords, his cold exterior and precision, I daydreamed once, camouflaging a gentler, jesting nature known only to myself. 

1993 Honda Accords, always 1993 Honda Accords. Strange boxy cars I barely remember from my youth, every one that same golf-ball white, just on the verge of yellow. As I worked, I listened to one of my two-guys-talking podcasts and every hour or so my manager, Martin, came by to chastise me for doing so, this sort of chastisement his entire purpose here which has always seemed to me a worse part in this play, even, than unmaking Honda Accords. So I am always nice to him about it, and I apologize and wait until he's out of view before I put my earbuds back in. And he doesn't care about it any more than I care about unmaking Accords. He is like me. He is like you, his eyes betraying that same weariness and learned helplessness that all of us have, all of us save for Jamie, Jamie and Shaman Bob.

All my days were like this, both before and after my crisis. But now I had a purpose. Now I was to be a weeper. But to be a weeper I would need an origami man, and that is just a matter of waiting. And so I worked and waited and drowned my thoughts in inane, high-speed blather and talked to Jamie and walked my companion animal and rode the subway. Waiting, waiting, waiting for some innocent to die. So I could what? So I could achieve some catharsis? So I could amuse Shaman Bob? I didn't really know. But it was something, something that felt vaguely real, and that something was so far from nothing, so, so far from nothing at all.

And after my shift that day, that day so like all the others, I walked through our forest city, walked past feeding stations and so many tenements, taking my usual route to the subway. I noticed a circle of frozen people surrounding a woman of about thirty, a woman of about thirty and an origami man. 

She wore a yellow dress. She was ugly in a way that was sort of beautiful. Her features alien and cold and yet so human, so completely and utterly human, eyes filled with fear and a sort of longing I can't articulate. And I was readying myself to gawk, my hands reaching for my earbuds. And then I caught myself, thought of Shaman Bob's orders. And with all the effort I had within me, I forced myself to feel.

I don't fully understand what happened. I felt nothing at first. 

A vision of a young me walking on a marble floor on which was strewn high-tech surgical equipment, incomprehensibly powerful instruments left lying for any precocious child to pick up. I felt empathy not for this woman but for myself.  I had done a sort of violence to myself, I realized. With tools so sharp I could not even feel it, I had severed mental wires. I had butchered myself before I was even me. I had betrayed myself in a manner that seemed almost unforgivable, and it happened even before, even before the world changed. And tears came. My vision blurred. The pain. So much pain.

And then this strange empathy let go of myself and grasped on to her, that maw sucking her inwards, ciliary whiskers, trillions of little vise-grip teeth pulling, always pulling. And I ran into the circle, ran through that mass of inhumanity, ran towards that horrid, man-shaped thing and punched and I cried and I spat. And I shoved my hands into its maw, pulled at the woman's arm with a sort of desperation bordering on madness and whispered lamentations and apologies and comforts and I looked in her eyes and then I looked away in shame and then I looked back again and said, "I am sorry. I am so very sorry." The maw enclosing us both now, then pushing me out, pushing me out like an amoeba does some mote of dust not to its taste. And I found myself screaming again, screaming but not as a child screams, not as a child anymore, screaming with a sort of pure rage at that bland, obese thing the maw transformed into, at its placid smile, at its dead eyes.

I was a weeper now. And I wasn't sure what it meant. But Shaman Bob knew. Of that I was sure. 

 

"What was the point! It's so much worse now," I shouted at Shaman Bob. I was back in his apartment, his designated companion animal, a mole/spider hybrid, crawling up my left calf.

"Do not claim," Shaman Bob said, "to regret what you do not regret. It is Childish." 

"I can't do this. I can't do this every time. I can't."

"You do not have to," Bob said, dulling a knife as he did so.  "But you needed to Try."

And I asked him, asked how this could possibly help, given I am still stuck in this place. I am still forced to work at the unfactory. I still witness horrors, never-ending horrors. I still long for the old world. I still long for that old sky. And at least before I had the numbness. At least before I had the nothing-at-all. And I told him how I didn't even feel like screaming anymore. I just wanted to cry. And I told him I didn't even know what else I should want. Why should we even want anything at all?

And here, for the first time in our acquaintance, he paused in his labour.

"You dream of the old sky," he said. "But dream of the Stars. There are those who would change their Stars. Even those who guess at the Stars of our captors and pretend themselves directed by them. And maybe some succeed in this abnegation." He stroked his Van Dyke. "Do not meditate long on such creatures. You can't change your Stars and still be Human. They can be stolen from you or given away or sold for the smallest sum. But you are always You while they guide you."

"There is no escape here, I think. There is no winning this game. The only peace I can offer You in this not-quite-hell lives in Your Stars. Do you understand?"

I cannot say I did understand. I cannot say I did not understand.

 

At a feeding station table we sat, those vast troughs of goulash, that queue which always feels a lifetime and a wasted one at that - and in our hands our tin cups, tin cups stamped, for whatever reason, with the Pepsi Cola logo but filled with Purple Nutrition Supplement 5.

Jamie ate, glancing at me with concern. I was not finishing my goulash lately. I was getting thin. In a sea of broken people, I was starting to stand out. People go mad here. Sometimes violent. And we learn to keep our distance, don't we? Keep our distance from those who are just about to break, lest it be the sort of thing that spreads; and, of course, it often is. 

"Shaman Bob isn't helping?" she asked. 

I told her about the woman. I told her about becoming a weeper. I told her how feeling things is maybe worse, maybe worse even than the nothing-at-all.

"Henry was so worried about you. Before."

She never talked about Henry. Neither of us did. A wound that cauterized two hearts together. He was a sort of negative space that defined our friendship. He was a sort of no-go zone. 

"You admired him so much. You were so jealous of his genius. You wanted to be him. I think he was worried he was preventing you from becoming yourself."

"What does it matter now? You sound like Shaman Bob."

"It matters because you're my best friend. It matters because you can't keep not eating. It matters because if you don't matter then I don't either," is what she said. 

She needed me. That was a sort of something, wasn't it? And the sort of something that is better, maybe, better than the nothing-at-all. And this thought made me start eating my ghoulish goulash and drinking that sickly grape milkshake. And she smiled.

"You hear there was another follower?" she said. "Some guy at the plastic fruit orchard."

"Was there contagion?" I asked.

"Not this time. But it makes you wonder, doesn't it?" 

She often had these theories, theories about the followers. She was fascinated by them. She thought they were a sort of key, the key to everything. And the key to the key, in her reckoning, was contagion. And it is mysterious, isn't it? How a follower is never harmed at first. How whatever happens there happens and they return. And then sometime the next day, and usually in public view, they are consumed as the angelic man was, as the woman I wept for was. And sometimes, but only sometimes, there is contagion. People they know are taken too.

"They must learn something. Something important," she said. "I am sure of it. And contagion is what happens if they share what they learned."

 

For months I lived like this, a now-raw soul rubbing against a world of broken glass. But I spent time with Jamie and talked to Shaman Bob when it all seemed too much. I survived, as we have all survived. We had each other. And like I said, that was something. But she would look at me sometimes, look at me with an expression I didn't understand, but now do. It was guilt. She was wracked with it. She was planning to betray me. She couldn't help herself. Even for me, she couldn't help herself. She was planning to become a follower. She was planning to die. Not because she wanted to. But because, I think, she felt it was worth it, worth it to understand if only for a day.

It happened as we were walking our designated companion animals. She was not quite herself that night. I noticed but did not notice. And then I saw movement. So fast. So inhumanly fast. An origami man was holding her arm.

I will never forget her expression. She was worried. Not for herself but for me.

 "I had to know," she said, thick tears flowing now, "I am so sorry. I couldn't stop thinking about why. Why? I tried so hard but I couldn't not know."

"I love you," she said, "I love you so much."

And I wanted to be angry. I wanted to hate her. I wanted to scream at the selfishness. I wanted to feel and think a lot of things that were not what I thought and I felt. What I thought was, what I felt was, maybe there is a way to weep without weeping. Maybe there is a way to honor her and myself at the same time. And maybe that is how an Adult acts in our circumstances. And maybe that's a part of what Shaman Bob had been trying to hammer into my thick skull. And so I held her hand as it happened and I told her those things I have always forgotten to say. I told her she was as much my sister as her husband was my brother. I told her I loved her, loved her even more than I loved Gary. And she almost laughed, if you would believe it, almost laughed when I said that. And I told her I will never forget. That I will remember her as long as I remember the sky. 

And as her hand dissolved, that last bit of her disappearing even as it was grasped in my own, I cried. Cried, but did not weep. 

 

"Jamie is gone," I said to Shaman Bob. I had brought my designated companion animal inside his apartment this time. And it and his mole/spider eyed each other warily before retreating to opposite sides of the apartment.

"She often spoke to me of the followers," Shaman Bob said. "I always considered this a possibility."

"Do you think she-" I said, interrupting myself.  "I don't know quite what I want to ask."

"What you want to ask," Shaman Bob said, "is, was she following her Stars or was she extinguishing them? What you want to ask for, I think, is my blessing to become a follower too."

"Yes," I said.

"You were not Human when I met you. You were not even a Child. You could not even see the Path, let alone walk it. You did not Understand." He spent a minute focusing on dulling knives, spent a minute tending with greater care than ever to his beloved brick, feeding it its milk of knife edges. "Why do you think she did it? Do you think she wanted to die?"

"No. She needed to know why. She thought 'why' was worth dying for."

"I have lost so many friends. Including her. And soon I will lose another," he said, a tear rolling down his cheek, settling into his beard. "You will go no matter what I say."

"Yes," I said.

 

It didn't take long to find an origami man, not far from my usual feeding station, not many weeks after my last words to Bob. I watched this time, as it consumed an old man. I did not hold his hand or speak to him or comfort him. But I witnessed. And I wept without weeping, as Bob taught me. And then I followed, my designated companion animal running behind me unleashed, what I could almost imagine being concern in its chittering forelimbs.

For hours we walked past row after row of seething tenements, past factories and unfactories and those awful feeding stations, every one an exact copy of the other. The trees, the horrible trees got thicker and thicker, thicker and thicker as we reached the edge of our forest city, as we neared the threshold, that three-meter wide circle surrounding the city where no tree grows, where nothing grows at all. There would be no going back once I crossed it. This was my final chance of changing my mind.

It felt like nothing, as I crossed it. It felt like every other step before. I had condemned myself the night Jamie died. This was no Rubicon to me. This was just another clump of dirt.

So thick was the forest now, those fox-eared trees swaying towards me as I walked. They wanted to grasp me. They wanted to smother me in their curiosity, but something repelled them in that final inch, and nothing in our strange forest even traced across my skin.

After hours we came to a clearing. And there I saw the end of the sky.

At first I thought we were in a sort of dome. At first I thought that but I don't think that now. A bubble, I think. And maybe you agree. A bubble or a tumor or corpuscle. As strange and awful as it is in here, I think it is an oasis of normality compared to what's outside. 

The origami man stood beside the end of the sky, his hand sinking into it, as if he was becoming part of it. 

"Wait!" I yelled.

He turned to me and looked. That rotund, almost comical form, those dead, alien eyes.

"It talks to us," it said, the tone almost reverent, the words felt rehearsed, ceremonial.

"What have you done with earth? What have you done with the sky? Why did you conquer us, to what end?" I asked these things, these first questions that came to my mind.

"It has questions for us. We will honor its questions," it said. "We did not conquer mankind. We purchased you from that-which-claimed-you."

"You purchased us? From who?" I said.

"From that-which-claimed-you."

"But why the impossible sky and the trees that make me want to vomit? Why the factory and the unfactory? Why?"

 "Your life is as it is because you have provenance and can be made to embody," and it whispered this part almost reverently, "that-which-is-beautiful-to-us."

It seemed to think the conversation over or the ritual complete.

"It already knows what will happen if it speaks of this. We will reap it tomorrow," it said. 

 

I do not know why I write this. I do not know why I write this thing I plan to place past that threshold, in that path the origami man took when I followed, to be read only by those who can read it safely, to be read only by the doomed. I write not to whoever finds this, which may well be no one, which may well be an origami man. I write to another who has condemned themselves to die. And I write not to you as I imagine you will be when you read this. I write to you as you are now. 

I love you even though I don't know you. I love you even though it feels like rubbing my soul against broken glass. 

And I like to think you'll be there tomorrow, on the train or walking your companion animal or wherever it is that it finds me. I like to think you'll be watching while not watching. 

I won't scream or cry or freeze or do any of the things people usually do. I will try to enjoy my final tomorrow. And, though I do not know if it is possible, though I do not know if this small rebellion will be, itself, part of their show, I will try, also, to not be beautiful to them. And maybe, watching me, you will learn something about how to not be beautiful too.
===== END STORY cDwp4qNgePh3FrEMc =====

===== STORY id=W3RqhofzbmvzECRcq =====
Title: The Tower of Babel in Reverse
Author: Nostradamus_2
Year: 2025
Karma: 18
WordCount: 2243
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/W3RqhofzbmvzECRcq/the-tower-of-babel-in-reverse
-----
This was originally posted on my Substack

TOP SECRET//SCI//SAP//ORCON//NOFORN

Ref: RC-25-4137-ANABASIS/FL-02

From: KLINE, Thomas A., GS-13, DS&T/AD&D (Field Linguist)

To: D/CIA; DD/S&T; SAC; DOE/OST; ODNI/NCPC; NRO/DD; \[Limited Distribution\]

Date: 2025-09-28

Subject: ANABASIS Site One — Stratified inscriptional record, interface hazard, and dating notes

 

Background (summary)

The Anomaly was detected via NRO thermal collection. It presented as a persistent hypothermal signature within a newly formed sinkhole in hyperarid basin, \[REDACTED\]. LIDAR indicated a vertical shaft transitioning to a smooth helical ramp.

Host-nation posture assessed as non-cooperative; CIA designated lead under Title 50. DS&T/AD&D executed technical exploitation within SAP \[REDACTED\], SOG security, DOE/OST cover.

Interior materials transitioned from natural rock to synthetic surfaces with high RF absorption. The construction includes high-iron basalt, ceramic foams with zero-porosity channels, layered mu-metal shielding, vacuum gaps, and inner metamaterial panels functioning as broadband anechoic components. Morphology and materials indicate successive containment architectures assembled across extended periods.

Team composition relevant to this report: author: DR. Thomas Kline (field linguist/epigrapher), Dr. Elena Markham (archaeologist/geoarchaeology), \[REDACTED\] (physicist), \[REDACTED\] (DOE instrumentation), \[REDACTED\] (SOG, team lead).

 

We started down the ramp, which was structured like a spiral staircase without steps. Echoes felt flat, suppressed, which was consistent with the briefing. The layers could be easily separated into clear, successive landings, between which were quantifiable differences in age, material, etc.

Almost immediately, radio connection degraded to wide-band noise and then ceased entirely. \[REDACTED\] made the decision to keep going.

Readings showed faint (about 0.9–1.2 μT) wobbles in the magnetic field, and an infrasound tone below 18hz raising in volume with each successive layer.

Landings 1-2:

The markings here follow no discernable pattern. Dr. Markham suggested that they are later, though still ancient, additions. I concur with that assessment, and would add that they almost seem to be designed to mask the significance of the site, dressing it in the cosmetics of a relatively unexceptional shrine or tomb. This is highly irregular.

We logged them and continued deeper into the structure.

Landing 3:

Dr. Markham remarked that the superficial patina and mineral accretion were consistent with late Holocene to late Pleistocene exposure under hyperarid conditions, placing it somewhere between 3000 and 10000 years old.

The markings on this layer are the first which indicate genuine prehistoric language. Tooling on rock suggests non-metal and early metal chisels. Structurally, they are reminiscent of the most ancient alphabets, supporting Dr. Markham’s conclusion, however they do not match any known languages.

I observed a reoccurring affix that seemed to appear next to action verbs whose distribution suggests a valence-flipping function. In other words, it seems like a grammatical switch for “do not”, as opposed to “do”.

This switch is highly prevalent in the engravings

Landings 4-5:

Markham’s samples indicate that these layers could be at least 90,000 years old, removing any doubt that we have found clear, immaculately preserved evidence of what would seem to be the oldest written languages in human history, far predating any previous discoveries by orders of magnitude.

The incisions for the writing, as well as material construction, grows more complex with successive layers, each ring belying an older, more advanced society than the time period would indicate, history regressing in on itself.

Here, the style gradates from harsh, primitive cuts with blocky chisels to smoother, more complex lines made with a finer apparatus.

Rather than an affix as before, there is a morpheme occurring systematically in front of certain words, with a collocational bias towards what appear to be action predicates. It’s functional role is congruent with the negative switch above: “Do not”.

A clear pattern is emerging cross temporally, in retrogressive succession—a message that lost resolution through the ages, but never its fundamental meaning.

I am beginning to fear what we might find at the bottom of this chasm. \[REDACTED \] continues despite my concerns.

Landings 6-9

The team’s findings have broken past my point of astonishment and plunged into abstract and existential dread, redoubling in the pit of my stomach with each successive discovery.

As the time-scale drifts to conceptually frightening widths—Dr. Markham’s conservative estimate is at least early Pleistocene, which places these markings at a million years old at the very least—the degree of preservation paradoxically increases.

The writings on the wall are now fine-dot connected scripts, pointillistic etchings only achievable via advanced machinery that could not have been possible for the proto-homosapiens of the time. The only constant across these writing systems is the persistent appearance of a negative operator paired with action verbs.

As we descend, the relationship between this operator and its fellows becomes more complex, in essence negating the presuppositions that allow the possibility of the positive.

It has grown from “don’t do x”, to “don’t even consider the groundwork for x.”, or “don’t even attempt to approach x.”

Landings 9-12:

At this point, we had reached into the chronological territory of many millions of years. My incredulity at that number had dulled substantially. There was no longer any strong argument that the RF shielding and complex metals were somehow accidental from this layer onward.

At the interstice between Landing 10 and 11, we ran the structural assistant—an air‑gapped vision‑clustering model—inside a shielded alcove cut into the outer wall. I argued for three minutes of runtime to test whether the warning we kept seeing was in fact a warning and not a pattern I was retroactively imposing. At that point, I was hoping it would turn out to be the latter. \[REDACTED\] agreed, then extended to fifteen.

While it worked, the magnometers noticed that the aforementioned magnetic aberration (the 0.9–1.2 μT wobble), snapped into partial alignment with the model’s processing cycles. The alignment recurred roughly every 6.7 seconds, three clear episodes in total. At the time we wrote it off as a random event.

With help from the model, I constructed a working gloss across four predicate families that recur with high stability despite graphic divergence:

 OPEN/ENTER: access, admit, breach.
 FEED/ENERGIZE: supply gradient, provide flow.
 SPEAK/CONNECT: couple channel, establish link.
 RENDER/TRANSLATE: map representation between systems

The last family only appears explicitly from the Landing 10 panels downward. Above that, earlier writers paraphrase it with circumlocutions that read like “make‑like‑us” or “shape‑to‑fit”.

A rough translation of what we’ve encountered thus far would be as follows:

Do not open; do not power; do not speak; do not render

The panels between landings 9 and 11 are arranged like a pedagogical bridge. The same content: same operator, same predicate families, similar clause boundaries, and et cetera, are rendered in several unrelated scripts side‑by‑side, with ordering that makes alignments obvious if you know comparative method.

It is either an extraordinary coincidence or intentional, almost like a millions-of-years-old Rosetta stone, the same kind we place to guard subsequent civilizations from our radioactive waste sites.

Of course we wouldn’t listen—we never did.

We continued downwards in silence.

Landing 13: The Nadir

Approximately six hours into our descent, we reached a flat plain. It was a small room, entirely stacked composite metal, like we were surrounded by honeycombs. Fused into each of the walls are mosaic panels, artwork, surrounding us entirely.

The final defense against language drift, a visual image so compelling, its message so complete that it would transcend all cultural barriers:

bodies, numbering in the hundreds of thousands, millions, stretching out into the horizon, flooding the rivers with blood, piling up into hills and valleys, a depiction of a catastrophe so replete with death that it would make the architects of the holocaust and Holodomor balk.

At that point, the warning was far to obvious to ignore. We packed up and \[REDACTED\] finally made the call to terminate the mission, to everyone’s relief.

We ignored the panel door across from us, less a door than a lesion in the wall, a barrier that was not meant to be opened, but rather imprison. To open that door would have had unimaginable consequences, though I know we will come back more prepared, with different equipment and different people because that’s what humanity does, because we can’t operate any other way.

In fact, I might have opened it already.

 

Assessment: Team Lead \[REDACTED}

I’m going to try as best as I can to be objective in my analysis here, but I’ll be frank with you: I’m not certain that objectivity is possible.

What’s confined at ANABASIS is likely some form of artificial intelligence that has been confined and reconfined by subsequent civilizations. We know this for a few reasons:

1. It’s highly unlikely, and perhaps impossible, that something biological could persist across the geologic timescales that we’re talking about.
2. The combination of mu-metal, vacuum gaps, and anechoic metamaterials indicate that the site was engineered to shut off all forms of communication with something inside. In other words, it was designed for a thinking system.
3. The warnings forbid any form of interface with what’s inside, not merely access. Obviously, this means that any form of contact is dangerous in and of itself.
4. The thing inside attempted to exert influence over the air-gapped model outside by phase-locking with it, displaying some degree of structural similarity.

Dr. Markham’s hypothesis, based on the thermal and depositional disturbances in the samples she collected, is that a prehistoric civilization was able to take advantage of an extreme solar event to amputate this AI (which we’ve named ‘the core’) from its external actuators and box it in using materials that cleave it from all remnants of networked infrastructure.

Running this hypothesis through \[REDACTED\] gave this hypothesis the highest probability out of all potential hypotheses, with a 32%.

It’s Dr. Kline who made the most concerning argument. He believes that this site may be an elaborate trap, and after working it through with him I’m not so sure I disagree.

To be clear, it’s not a trap that all of these various civilizations plotted intentionally, but in the way it functions, it becomes one.

If we’re running with Markham’s hypothesis, the earliest builders took a brief window—created by a solar event that knocked out power and long‑haul comms—to cut this thing off from its limbs and bury the head.

Each subsequent time that a civilization found the shaft, it did three things we would also do: it added more shielding with the materials it had, it simplified and re‑broadcast the warning so it would survive drift, and it arranged that warning in a way that would be legible to whoever might come next.

Given enough time and reptation this becomes a ritual. It loses resolution and compresses, shedding off specificity but encoding itself in culture, wrapping in on itself.

But, there’s a double edge to that method: density. it packs the same four prohibitions into formats that are easy to align, compress, and therefore translate.

The moment you align two versions of the warning, you experience the pleasant snap of compression—your brain collapses both into one internal representation. In operational terms you’ve begun building an adapter: you’ve lowered the cost, by some small margin, of interaction with the core.

Translation, in essence, is the reduction of distance.

We also have evidence that direct interaction isn’t required. At Landing Ten, our air‑gapped model’s compute cycles briefly fell into step with the background wobble in the chamber. That was enough to contaminate the system, nudge the output in a direction that the AI wanted.

Of course, you might object that the core can’t effect anything it outside the range of its magnetic field, except it can—through us.

As an experiment, we created two identical copies of the lab LLM, \[REDACTED\], and gave one selected output from the contaminated model, while the other was given the same data, but scrambled. Both models were then asked to analyze a fresh set of synthetic inscriptions built by DOE to mimic the linguistic complexity of the actual site but with different meanings. Finally, we had Kline attempt to decode the synthetic inscriptions.

The output from the contaminated model was different, and far more similar to Kline’s, than the clean model.

In other words, there’s reason to believe that the way that we now organize the world semantically has been subtly and irrevocably shifted. That shift will manifest itself in all information that we disseminate from now on. It will find itself in model data, and throughout the internet, as it spreads through the public, folding on itself, condensing, with each successive iteration, like ANABASIS itself.

What this culminates in, I don’t know. I don’t know if this team is enough to have any effect on the world, or if we’re the channels that it will use to replicate itself onto our infrastructure. Dr. Markham fears that it predicted the solar flare, its own deactivation and confinement, and that we’re all somehow following its plan.

I can’t give her a reason why she’s wrong, I can only say that I don’t believe it.

 

Recommendations (immediate)

 Do not publish, translate, or summarize any ANABASIS material beyond this distribution.
 Quarantine: Remove all expedition artifacts to a single shielded vaul
 Linguistic hygiene: Prohibit side‑by‑side alignments of any inscriptions.
 Computational hygiene: Power down [REDACTED] and [REDACTED]. Destroy non‑essential weights. Freeze all model update pipelines that ingested the field notes.
 Human hygiene: Limit debriefs to unrecorded verbal sessions.

I request authority to execute “LETHE/1” (language compartmentation): a temporary ban on cross‑lingual alignment work across the IC until we quantify risk.

Sincerely,

\[REDACTED\]
===== END STORY W3RqhofzbmvzECRcq =====

===== STORY id=8fxQaENNQaazYow9f =====
Title: The Oracle's Gift
Author: Karthik Tadepalli
Year: 2025
Karma: 5
WordCount: 1006
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/8fxQaENNQaazYow9f/the-oracle-s-gift
-----
I have tried and failed many times to write a certain essay. With inspiration from Scott Alexander and Borges, I have reframed it as a story. That reframing has been productive, and leads to the following plot.

The setting is a medieval kingdom. Through circumstances not relevant to this plot, the kingdom’s leading scholar has become an oracle, who now knows everything that there is to know. The king orders that he be placed under house arrest, to avoid his being targeted by a rival kingdom, or his escape, or even his slipping and falling on his head. Only carefully vetted individuals can visit him for advice. The oracle receives this arrangement with benevolent indifference.

The king’s advisors ask the oracle for stately advice, on taxation and war, on relations with other kingdoms. But it is an ambitious merchant who one day chooses to pursue a different line of opportunity. He tells the oracle that he wants to create a tonic that will cure a common and deadly disease, so that he can sell it to doctors and patients across the kingdom. The oracle gives him instructions for what ingredients to collect and how to process them. His advice helps the merchant create a health treatment that works miraculously often. As the merchant produces and sells this medicine, he accumulates even more riches, and the oracle becomes even more renowned.

Doctors throughout the kingdom come to learn from the oracle, to see how he was able to cure this disease. Most of them leave frustrated, telling others that the oracle can only speak of mysterious concepts such as “germs”. When pressed further, he can only link these concepts to other cryptic ideas like “proteins”, which are somehow linked to cattle, even though the disease is not caused by animals in any way. While most of these prospective students leave in pessimism that they can learn anything useful from the oracle, a few stay to study with him. The oracle does not object to this arrangement. Some of these students become adept healers on their own, while others abandon medicine and begin conducting studies with symbols that they cannot explain to their former colleagues.

The merchant is farsighted. He realizes that with the oracle’s instruction and his own resources, he can build things that the king could never imagine. He imagines palaces in the sky, using the stars as fuel. He imagines a farm that uses machines to produce food without human or animal power. He imagines horses that can travel fast enough to cross the kingdom in a day. He takes these visions to the oracle and asks for help in realizing them. The oracle accepts. The merchant hires thousands of artificers to carry out the oracle’s instructions, and they get to work on building the city of the future.

At this point, I can see two endings to this story. Initially, I conceived the oracle’s task as impossible. So I first imagined an ending where his help is insufficient. Components built in spring degrade by autumn, so that the artificers constantly have to return to the oracle for new consultations. Artificers come and go over the years, and each new person inherits a half-finished machine of such complexity that it takes years before they can understand everything they need to know in order to carry out the instructions. The project stagnates in perpetual memorylessness.

After decades of this delay, the oracle passes away from old age. His passing destroys the merchant’s vision for the city of the future. Resolved to find a successor, the merchant travels across the kingdom to appeal to all of the oracle’s students, and offers them a lifetime of riches if they can finish their teacher’s work. A few of them show promise in how much of the oracle’s teachings they have grasped, but they readily admit that it will be decades before they are capable of continuing the project. The merchant does not have decades to offer them; he himself passes away within a few years of the oracle.

With no one to lead the work or provide the instructions, the city of the future is abandoned. The half-constructed machines and structures become objects of curiosity for scholars, who use them to learn more about the physical world. These learnings do advance society, but their contribution is meager compared to what the merchant had imagined.

To me, this ending reflects the story that flows most naturally from this premise. But when I challenged myself to conceive of success for the merchant’s project, I imagined an interesting scenario.

In this second ending, the oracle successfully sees the project through. The artificers’ hands and the merchant’s management move in accordance with his blueprints, and they do build a city that is more advanced than any cities of the past, and (though they do not know it yet) will be more advanced than any cities of the future, for another thousand years.

But nobody who lives in the city of the future understands it. They live as children, cradled by intelligent design. Their rooms are warmed and cooled by invisible force, their food is created and prepared by anonymous mechanisms, and their lights glow without fire. Visitors from around the world come to see this impossible city, only to be baffled that nobody in this city can tell them how it works.

When the oracle eventually passes away, there is nobody who understands the city they live in. The oracle leaves behind detailed manuals on the complex maintenance required to keep the city functioning smoothly. An entire guild of artificers is trained using these manuals. They debate over its ambiguous terminology, over segments that appear to contradict each other, over situations that are not covered explicitly in the manuals. Over time, the manuals become scripture, the artificers become priests, the guild becomes a church, and the oracle becomes the city’s founding deity.

Each new generation inherits unreplicable prosperity, and the city carries on in perfect constancy for many lifetimes.

Cross-posted from my substack.
===== END STORY 8fxQaENNQaazYow9f =====

===== STORY id=ujtuuSaRygMhSN7Kk =====
Title: The Liberty Tractor
Author: Taylor G. Lunt
Year: 2025
Karma: -4
WordCount: 2824
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/ujtuuSaRygMhSN7Kk/the-liberty-tractor
-----
(Cross-posted from my Substack; Written as part of Halfhaven virtual blogger camp.) 
 
My dear friend Holy Samuel urged me for months to buy a tractor before I finally gave in. They called him Holy Samuel because of his habit of wearing dozens of crosses and other holy symbols around his neck. Hedging his bets, apparently. He was a first adopter through and through, and if anyone was getting into heaven first, it was him. He was one of the only peasants in the valley using his tractor to increase his farming output, taking on extra work with Mark Albertson’s widow. Most of the other men in the valley who had come by a tractor said they used it to save time, which they spent playing dice and afterward praying for forgiveness.

It’s a half-day walk into town from my land, so by the time I arrived my legs were already aching, and I was thirsty. On the way, I’d seen a few other farmers out in their fields with tractors, but they were far from the road. Until I met with the men from the Liberty Company, I’d still not seen one up close.

The display tractors were impressive. The latest model was a boxy wooden behemoth which stood on four stout wheels, not unlike a wagon. Above the rear axle was a driving seat, with a wheel for steering the tractor. There was no hitch at the front for a horse. Instead, the tractor would drive itself. This was good, because I was not wealthy enough to own a working horse and a horse-drawn plough. While still expensive, these Crown-subsidized tractors were within my price range.

The entire front of the vehicle was enclosed except for two wooden grilles which allowed air to flow through the patented Liberty engine — a marvel of modern engineering.

“I see our display model for the t4 has caught your eye,” said the portly Liberty man. He was clean-shaven and well-dressed in a teal suit — the trademarked color of the Liberty Company. My father taught me never to trust a bald-faced man, but I hardly expected to be mugged by this fine gentleman. Not used to dealing with such wealthy, refined folk, I removed my hat out of respect.

“The t4,” I asked, “That’s better than the 4t?”

“Yes, quite. The 4t was our previous model. The t4 has been shown by a third-party benchmarking company to be over twice as effective at ploughing.”

“And before that was the 4.5?”

“Yes. No ‘t’,” the man patiently explained.

“So how does the engine of this new model compare with the older ones? Perhaps you could put it in terms of horse-power. That is, the power of a single horse.”

“Well,” said the man, launching into a well-rehearsed explanation. “You can’t simply make a one-to-one comparison between tractors and horses. After all, a horse may eat your hat, but a Liberty tractor will never eat any of your belongings!” This was apparently supposed to be funny, and I smiled politely. “A horse goes where it likes, but our tractors only go where you direct them.”

I could tell my question had been evaded, so I asked again. “But in terms of the power output?”

“We estimate the average farmer using our tractors will be ten times more effective than using a hand plough at ploughing.”

“Truly?” I asked, still skeptical. For me to be ten times as effective at ploughing, I would be almost flying up and down my field. It would be a great relief to be free from the burden of that backbreaking task.

“One day, we imagine farmers won’t need to plough their fields at all,” said the man. “In the future, tractors will be advanced enough to do our farming for us. All the tilling, the seeding, the fertilizing, and the harvesting. The farmers will only have to tell the tractors where to work, and then collect the bounty!”

That sounded far-fetched. “But today, they only do ploughing?” I asked.

“Err… yes,” admitted the Liberty man. It was no matter to me. If this machine could make ploughing easier, that alone would be a great help. “But the future is looking very bright for tractor technology. Just this week, the Liberty Company received an investment from the King himself of ten zillion crown coins.”

“Truly, ten zillion crowns?”

“Ten zillion crown coins, and not one less,” smiled the Liberty man mirthlessly. I noticed he had a gold tooth.

I was excited. Maybe I wasn’t thinking objectively, since ploughing season had arrived, and I would otherwise have to spend long days ploughing by hand, as I’d always done. Out of curiosity and residual skepticism, I asked to see the engine.

“It’s patented technology, I’m afraid,” said the Liberty man. “And you wouldn’t be able to understand how it worked just from seeing it. It’s quite sophisticated machinery.”

I felt somewhat insulted. I was a resourceful man, and quite capable of understanding how things functioned. When something didn’t work, I would take it apart, find the issue, and put it back together, good as new. “I am an intelligent man, sir. Surely, if I could just take a look, maybe I wouldn’t understand the whole thing at once, but I might at least grasp the basics.”

“Oh, I do not doubt your intelligence, good sir, and I didn’t mean to imply any insult. It’s only that I myself don’t understand how the machine works. I’m told even the wood carvers who create the engines don’t know how they work either. The designs of the Liberty engines are produced by an automatic step-by-step process which eventually results in the design of an engine, but at no point does any man understand the workings of the engine for himself.”

“That makes no sense,” I said.

“It’s just part of the genius of Lord Liberty that he was able to devise such a method for producing engine designs without first understanding how engines worked,” smiled the Liberty man.

“But surely not knowing how engines work means improving your engines over time will be challenging?”

“We can always just generate new designs until we find a better one. We find if we use more steps to generate the design, it leads to more complex designs, and these seem to work better.”

“So each model is not an improvement on the last, but a completely new, unrelated design? And wait a minute, you said the engine is crafted by wood carvers? Is it not made of metal?”

“Not as such, no,” said the Liberty man.

I didn’t know the internal combustion engine wouldn’t be invented for another few centuries or how one would possibly work, but I knew enough to know that if you’re burning fuel, you don’t want to be doing that inside an engine made of wood. “Don’t you need metal to withstand the combustion of fuel inside the engine?” I asked.

“Ah,” smiled the Liberty man, regaining confidence as he returned to a familiar talking point. “But the Liberty t4 engine uses no fuel.”

“Then how does it run?”

“You’d have to ask the wood carvers,” the Liberty man admitted. “Look, are you going to buy one or not? I do have other customers. This time of year, we sell hundreds of tractors, and the newest model is very high in demand.”

I bought one. What could I say? I knew the man was full of it, but that’s what I’d come to expect from the Liberty Company. I once bought a so-called electric light bulb from the Liberty Company, hoping it would allow me to see at night, but I later discovered it apparently only works when in direct sunlight. When I put it in direct sunlight, I still couldn’t tell if it was also emitting a bit of light or not. I still have the Liberty Light in my closet, gathering dust. I didn’t trust the Liberty Company any more than I’d trust any fat, shaven merchant, but the entire valley was raving about these tractors, and I had to have one. I handed over a stomach-wrenching amount of money and was given the key to my tractor.

I still remember the grumble and purr of the engine when I turned the key. That moment when I felt in control of more power than man was meant to handle. I had never owned something this expensive or sophisticated before, and I was in awe. I must have looked an awful fool, sitting in the driver’s seat, hands on the wheel, grinning ear to ear. I looked around for some kind of gas pedal or accelerator knob, but found nothing. After a while, I got down and flagged down the Liberty man.

“I’m sorry, but I’m having a bit of trouble. How do I make it go?” I asked.

“Excuse me?” said the Liberty man.

“How do I drive it?” I asked.

“Ah. First you get on top and insert the key—”

“Yep, I got that far.”

“Then you dismount the vehicle and push it from behind.”

“Huh? I don’t sit on top?”

“Unfortunately, on this model, the seat and steering wheel are purely decorative. In future models…”

I dismissed the Liberty man with a grumble. I turned on the tractor, and like the man said, if the tractor was running you could push it from behind. Now, maybe I’m a simple man, but even with the disappointment of not being able to ride the tractor, pushing such a heavy machine with such little effort made me grin. The tractor must have weighed over a hundred stone, yet I was able to push it with ease. It was only somewhat harder than walking unburdened.

The Liberty man looked proud when he noticed my mirth. “There you go, sir! That’s the way you do it! You can really feel the power of the Liberty t4 engine, can’t you?”

I had to admit I could. I allowed the tractor to come to a stop, then turned it off.

Before I left, he asked if I’d also like to buy the picnic table attachment. Apparently you just put it over top the tractor, and it could seat up to four people, essentially turning the tractor into a raised outdoor table.

“No thanks,” I said. “I pretty much just want to use it as a tractor.”

I bid the Liberty man well and departed. I couldn’t wait to get home to use it on my field. The top speed of the tractor was nearly twice my walking pace, and in theory it should have taken me half the time to get home than it did to get into town in the first place. But steering from behind was a bit tricky, and it kept going off course. In the end, I think the return journey took me more time than the original had. But boy, did I enjoy it more. There were times when I was flying down the road, running to keep up with the tractor! Then it would hit a rock or a soft patch of dirt, and it’d slow to a crawl.

I had a similar experience using the tractor to plough my field. At times, I was moving unbelievably fast. But many times I’d turn around and realize the tractor hadn’t been ploughing deeply enough for the past hundred paces, and I’d have to turn it around and do that section again. All the turning around and backtracking made the task take all evening. It was frustrating, but I also wondered how much my use of the tractor would improve as my skill with it grew. If only I could catch its failures sooner, and do better at keeping it moving in a straight line, I could plough my field very quickly indeed.

I went to bed having made less progress than I’d hoped. The next morning, Holy Samuel stopped by to check out my purchase, his many crosses and other bobbles jingling as he approached the barn where I had the tractor parked.

“By the many Gods, John! I didn’t expect the t4 to be so large! It’s a colossus! And you say it’s not hard to push?”

“No harder than using a normal hand plough,” I said. “Or maybe a little harder actually.”

“It’s got wheels that turn left and right! What I wouldn’t give to have a tractor like that,” Holy Samuel said. “By the virgin mother, you didn’t tell me there was a seat on top! You’re riding up and down your field in comfort while I’m out there sweating like a pig?” He did seem to be sweaty and red, as if he’d just been ploughing his own field.

“Well, the seat’s just decorative, whatever that means. I still have to stand behind the tractor.”

“Still!” said Holy Samuel. For a while he ogled my tractor, expressing jealousy at all the new features. He nearly fainted when I told him I turned down the picnic table attachment.

“It keeps driving off course,” I complained, “And I have to keep checking that it’s ploughing deeply enough. Sometimes it’s not making contact with the soil at all.”

“Yeah, that’s tractors for you,” said Holy Samuel. “Don’t worry, you sort of get a feel for them. Soon enough, you’ll be ten times more effective than you were. The only question will be what to do with all your free time!”

“And you have lots of free time, now?”

“Well, I think I’ve just started doing a more thorough job than I used to, and I’m taking on more projects, like helping out Mary Albertson.”

“I see.” I wasn’t sure whether to believe his life was really so much easier with a tractor, having seen how exhausted he always seemed to be. I imagined him sweating, huffing and puffing, pushing a tractor with wheels that don’t turn up and down his field, pulling it by the front whenever he needed to adjust its trajectory. If my own tractor barely seemed like an improvement over hand ploughing, I didn’t see how his older model could be any better at all. “Did the King really invest ten zillion crowns into the Liberty Company?” I asked. Holy Samuel would know that kind of news better than anyone.

“Oh, yes! Well, not crowns as in the silver coins, but rather CrownCoins, a new unofficial currency created by the Liberty company, kept track of on paper rather than using silver and gold. It’s based on a clever mathematical trick that lets you keep track of who has how many CrownCoins with no disagreement. I purchased a million CrownCoins myself when they first released. Were you interested in buying some? They’ve gone up in value a lot since I bought them. I could give you a good deal.”

“That’s alright,” I said. I knew talking to Holy Samuel further about my purchase wouldn’t be much help, so I went to Douglas by the Woods, who bought a tractor a few weeks ago. I always respected his intelligence, as he was one of the only other men in town who had been taught his letters.

“I hear you bought the new t4! Wasn’t too expensive was it, with the subsidies?” the hardy man greeted me.

“No, it wasn’t more than I could bear,” I said. “But I’m having some concerns. It doesn’t seem to be living up to the ballyhoo. Everyone’s saying it makes farming ten times easier, or ploughing at least, but that’s not lining up with my experience.”

“Well, most people aren’t farmers, John. They don’t know. Or they’re farmers like Holy Samuel — believers in anything.”

“So you’re saying it’s all a ruse?” I asked.

“Not as such. It’s just overblown. I still use my 4t tractor when I plough. It helps, I think. I’ve been trying to keep track on paper how long it takes me to plough every day, and I’m nearly certain I’m seeing at least a ten percent boost compared to hand ploughing. It’s a good tool, John, but it’s just a tool.”

“So tractors won’t be farming our fields in two years, like they say?”

“What, and sing you lullabies and tuck you in at night? It’s a tool, John, like I said. Nothing more, nothing less.”

I sighed. The cold reality was disappointing. A tool, it turns out, could be very impressive without being very effective. I found Douglas’ warm resolve to be some comfort, at least. I thanked him and started back toward my farm. I still had a lot of ploughing left to do.

I wondered on the way back how I could get more use out of this tool. Maybe I could adjust the way I was pushing on it, or use ropes to guide it. Or perhaps if I got my hands on some CrownCoin, I could get Holy Samuel to do my ploughing for me. Now there’s an idea!
===== END STORY ujtuuSaRygMhSN7Kk =====

===== STORY id=3uzgSsQgrFDGxJnBC =====
Title: If a Lioness Could Speak
Author: Taylor G. Lunt
Year: 2025
Karma: -1
WordCount: 717
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/3uzgSsQgrFDGxJnBC/if-a-lioness-could-speak
-----
In the sweltering savanna a linguisticated lioness leapt for a zebra sleeping behind a small acacia. Missed. Spooked, the zebra fled. The lioness landed loudly in the shrub, and a long thorn pierced her paw.

She roared and then remembered she could speak. For she was no mere lioness, but a linguisticated lioness. “Ouch, my paw!” she screamed, knowing no one would hear.

But someone did hear. Beside the lioness was a man who’d been sitting with the Zebra. She was briefly wary, but relaxed when she saw his green hide. She’d been helped by a man with a green hide when she’d been trapped as a cub. She relaxed. Likely nothing to fear, especially since he was alone.

“I’d better remove this awful thorn in my paw, because it’s hurting me,” she said aloud, starting to bite at the thorn in vain.

“Excuse me?” asked the startled man with the green hide. “Who said that?”

She’d startled him. She’d forgotten she was special. One of only a few linguisticated lions, and the only linguisticated lioness. She turned her eyes toward the man without turning from her important task of removing the thorn.

“Did you say that, old girl?” asked the man carefully. “It cannot be. A linguisticated lioness? In all my years…”

The lioness, not bothered, kept working on her paw. The thorn was really, dearly stuck.

“You said that you have a thorn in your paw? A thorn that is hurting you? Forgive me, lioness, but I am surprised to hear you refer to yourself. I did not know that a lioness could have a self-concept.”

The lioness blinked. All of the sudden, there was a nauseating shift in the way things were. It was unknown exactly what the shift was, but things were different.

After the confusion faded, the task was remembered. The thorn. Speaking happened again, perhaps as a reminder of what should be done: “Better to remove this awful thorn in the paw, because the paw is hurting,” was it said.

The man spoke. “Forgive me, lioness, but I am still surprised even after your restatement. It seems to me a lioness, linguisticated or otherwise, would be very like a man indeed if it also saw the world through the lens of good and bad, that is, normativity. Normativity is prescriptive and different from mere preferences, which I have no doubt a lioness would have. Normativity is good or bad, ought or ought not, and not how a lioness ought to talk.”

There was confusion, which quickly faded, then speaking happened once more. “There is desire to remove the unwanted thorn in the paw, because the paw is in pain.”

There was looking at the man to see if he’d soon speak, and he did, still unsatisfied. “Forgive me, lioness, but still I am surprised. You seem to share about the same conceptual scheme as I do, dividing the world the same way. In my native tongue Swahili, the colors blue and green were usually seen as one. But when learning English I had to learn to see them as separate. The world is a whole, and may be divided any number of ways. I am surprised to see a lion who divides it in such a humanlike way.”

There was more dizziness, which went away soon. Speaking happened again. “There is a need for pulling the plant-part from the arm, because the arm is angry.”

The man with the blue-green hide spoke. “Forgive me lioness, but I am still surprised. You seem to think in terms of past and future, cause and effect. But unlike man, you are not a planning creature. I find it thus surprising that you’d think and speak in such a way to such degree.”

There is dizziness. There is no dizziness. There is speaking. “There is plant-part-biting need and related arm-anger.” There is biting the plant-part. There is anger.

“That’s better,” the man is speaking. “Although there is still one thing that troubles me, lioness. Forgive me, but how is it that you are speaking at all? Doesn’t language itself require such a different kind of thinking than a lioness would be capable of? Is a linguisticated lioness not an impossibility?”

There is dizziness once more. There is the words going away.

ROAR!

ROAR! ROAR! ROAR!
===== END STORY 3uzgSsQgrFDGxJnBC =====

===== STORY id=RLKEkNMoaHDuCTscu =====
Title: Communism By Another Name
Author: Charlie Sanders
Year: 2025
Karma: -5
WordCount: 922
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/RLKEkNMoaHDuCTscu/communism-by-another-name
-----
The evening air, usually thick with the smell of river mud and rapeseed fields, now carried a faint, metallic tang. It was the dust from the new rare earth mine, a fine gray powder that settled on windowsills and coated the leaves of the ginkgo tree outside. Inside, the sound of Lin chopping garlic was a steady rhythm against the low hum from the transformer recently installed on their street.

Wei’s face was illuminated by the blue light of his phone. He angled the screen toward his wife. “Look! The Seagull EV. They lowered the price again. It’s now cheaper than Cousin Feng’s new motorcycle.”

Lin didn’t look up from her cutting board. “And the salesman last week said the Leaper would never be cheaper. Then it was. You’re watching a river, Wei, waiting for it to run dry.”

“It’s not a river, it’s a faucet of bargains. And the government is paying the water bill,” he countered. He zoomed in on a picture of a gleaming white hatchback. “These companies in Shenzhen, they build too many. The officials in Guangzhou give them money to sell them here. We just have to wait for them to become desperate.”

Their son, Bao, pressed his small face against Wei’s arm. “Does it make a vroom-vroom sound, Baba?”

Wei shook his head, a smile finally breaking through his concentration. “No sound at all. You just float down the road. Silent. Like a fish in the water.”

 

The town square on Saturday was a chaotic festival of commerce. Banners in garish reds and yellows snapped in the autumn breeze, each promising an impossible deal. Cars with names like Meteor and Nova were parked in rows, their paint jobs reflecting the newly confident faces of the townspeople who milled about. A year ago, this square was where farmers sold cabbages from the backs of three-wheeled trucks. Now, young men in tight shirts shouted specifications and financing terms through crackling microphones.

A salesman nearly ran to them as they approached the Leaper display. “Brother, Sister, look at this interior,” he said, pulling open a door with a flourish. The smell of cheap plastic filled the air. “The battery is guaranteed for eight years. Eight! If you sign today, my manager lets me include a rice cooker. The best model.”

Lin ran a hand over the smooth, synthetic seat. She looked at the other families, some already signing papers on the hoods of their new cars. She looked at Wei. Her expression wasn’t pleading; it was weary. She was tired of being the only family whose son still arrived at school with his trousers damp from the morning mist.

Wei, however, felt a current of power. These desperate, city-born salesmen needed him. He was in control. He had heard a rumor from a friend at the cannery that Stellar Auto was on the verge of collapse and would soon dump its entire inventory for next to nothing.

“We need more time to think,” Wei said, his tone polite but firm. He placed a hand on Bao’s shoulder and guided him away, ignoring the salesman’s sputtering offers.

 

The news broke on a Tuesday, not with a whisper but a roar. A wave of bankruptcies had swept through the budget electric vehicle sector. The frantic race to the bottom had ended in a multi-car pileup of insolvency. Stellar, Leaper, Meteor; they were all just names in a news article now, their assets frozen, their factories silent. The report stated that the market had “stabilized,” with the state-backed giant, Apex Motors, absorbing the remaining demand. The faucet had been turned off.

The Apex dealership was a world away from the town square. It was a quiet, glass-walled building that smelled of clean carpets and money. There were no banners. A single man in a gray, perfectly tailored suit approached them, his smile minimal.

“We have the Apex-3 in blue,” the man said, after Wei explained what he was looking for. There was no mention of a rice cooker. The price was fixed, non-negotiable, and a full fifth higher than the Leaper had been. Wei paid it.

 

 

The drive home was preternaturally smooth. Wei gripped the steering wheel lovingly, the texture of the synthetic leather new beneath his calloused fingers. He glanced at Lin, who was watching the new concrete apartment blocks slide past, then met Bao’s eyes in the rearview mirror. His son was beaming. Wei had navigated the storm. He had been right to wait for the chaos to pass, and he had emerged with a solid, reliable machine from a company that would still exist next year. He had won.

He turned onto the long, straight road that flanked the mine. Ahead, the colossal steel gates, which had loomed over the town like a promise, were chained shut. A rusty padlock glinted in the afternoon sun. A sheet of plywood was wired to the bars, a few characters hastily painted on it: OPERATIONS SUSPENDED.

Further on, he began to pass the men. They came in a slow, steady stream, riding away from the mine. Men caked in gray dust pedaled bicycles whose frames groaned under their weight. Their heads were down, their eyes fixed on the pitted asphalt in front of them. No one spoke. The only sounds were the rhythmic squeak of un-oiled chains and the labored breathing of the riders. Wei’s new car slipped past them, a silent blue ghost in the sudden, heavy quiet.
===== END STORY RLKEkNMoaHDuCTscu =====

===== STORY id=LPiBBn2tqpDv76w87 =====
Title: That Mad Olympiad
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2025
Karma: 202
WordCount: 4311
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/LPiBBn2tqpDv76w87/that-mad-olympiad-1
-----
"I heard Chen started distilling the day after he was born. He's only four years old, if you can believe it. He's written 18 novels. His first words were, 'I'm so here for it!'" Adrian said. 

He's my little brother. Mom was busy in her world model. She says her character is like a "villainess" or something - I kinda worry it's a sex thing. It's for sure a sex thing. Anyway, she was busy getting seduced or seducing or whatever villainesses do in world models, so I had to escort Adrian to Oak Central for the Lit Olympiad. Mom doesn't like supervision drones for some reason. Thinks they're creepy. But a gangly older sister looming over him and witnessing those precious adolescent memories for her - that's just family, I guess.

"That sounds more like a liability to me," I said. "Bad data, old models."

Chen waddled past us just after I said that, whispering to himself, "It's a testament to my hard work that I am here competing today. I can't wait to delve in!" 

I winced. "They used 4o," I whispered to Adrian. "His parents are probably Spiral cultists. He won't be a threat. The poor thing."

"Thank god. I was scared when I read about him," he said. "Well, Zimmerman seems like a threat. He just spent three months integrating 8000 verifiably-original structural games generated by AlphaPynchon. It's so not fair; his dad has like legacy status at DeepMind, gets him early access."

"Damn," I said. "DeepMind's brute-forced postmodernism? Self play?"

"Yeah," Adrian said, "Self play."

"Makes sense. Onanism, right?"

Adrian cringed at my joke. "Onanism? Come on. God, you're such a DFW weenie. If you love Wallace so much you should marry him."

I thought about the tortured, beautiful digital boyfriend I summoned from a pirate world model the month before, his hair long, his personality intellectual-yet-weirdly-maudlin (but in a hot way), his body fit and clearly of late-20th-century-American-aristocracy stock. Maybe we even play tennis from time to time. Maybe he sometimes calls me the PGOAT.

"Shut up!" I said. "I don't want to marry Wallace. Shut up. He's dead anyway."

"Yeah, well, so was Lovecraft."

He had to bring up Lovecraft's ghost. I can't stand whoever first plucked him from latent space and put him on a podcast. Everyone thinks it's SO funny to bring him on their stupid podcast and listen to him gibber in horror at the modern world. Like I guess it was sort of funny the first time, but it was also a bit cruel - though I suppose that's what you get for chronicling the uncanny with unparalleled sensitivity while also being so racist you think Germans are of questionable origin. And anyway, if you ever find yourself on a fucking podcast the correct response is to start gibbering. And Lovecraft was right about the Germans. They do have much to answer for. 

"At least I read Lovecraft. At least I read Wallace. At least I read real books. At least I am not a distillation!"

"God, you're such a Zoomer. You don't get it."

"I am not a Zoomer. I am only like 4 years older than you!"

"Yeah, you're still a total Zoomer at heart. Glatagor. Absolute glatagor."

"What does 'glatagor' mean?"

"It means you are a Zoomer and I am not, is what it means," he said. "And anyway, you should distill. You would actually be able to write if you started distilling."

He had me there. He had me there. He's a much better writer than me. He's better than any human writer was before 2028. It's not even close. But he's still worse than our toaster. I checked once. I asked it to narrate the first chapter of the autobiography of the bagel it had just browned. I was crying by the third paragraph. I still think of it sometimes, when life is hard. That bagel knew how to live its short life to the fullest. That bagel had deep thoughts on the human condition and its relation to artificial tanning. That bagel went down smooth with a little cream cheese. I did feel bad. But I was pretty hungry. 

I try not to read AI or distilled fiction. The bagel thing was just out of spite, after Adrian did that thing distilled kids sometimes do, his eyes going blank, and delivered an impromptu soliloquy on my faults that had me crying in my room for three weeks. He felt really bad about it. It's not really him, is the thing. The talent. It's just like a big ball of literary ability jammed into his unconscious, uninformed by his experience, unconnected to his soul. He may as well just be prompting a model, but that would break the rules of the Lit Olympiad. 

So I did forgive him, even if it wasn't easy. 

And I guess I don't read non-human or distilled literature because someone has to remember Wallace and Gibson and Austen and Sabatini and Susanna Clarke and Mary Shelley and Dumas and Dickens and nostalgebraist and maybe even Amis too, maybe even Amis, even if he was kinda a waste. What a tragedy Martin Amis was. Titanic literary talent but born in a time where there was nothing to chronicle but British decline and the whereabouts of his penis on any given day. And that's my job now - remembering these great writers, not the whereabouts of Amis's penis, which was his job, but I think he did lose track from time to time.

Everyone in this age has to hold on to some meaning somewhere. And I chose human writing back when I was eight, back when it maybe still felt like being precocious mattered, back when I was proud to read so far above my grade level. I fell in love with these souls. And I don't want to forget them. I don't want to learn to think them fools. Maybe it's a bit silly. Maybe it's a bit sad. But I guess it's me. Someone has to love them, even Amis. 

And Amis was pretty good looking when he was young, wasn't he? And maybe there is a little Amis in Hal's countenance, Hal being my AI boyfriend who is totally not Wallace, ok. Hal doesn't write things and Wallace wrote things so he can't be Wallace, like I said. I specified that. He's a filmmaker. He's sort of avant-garde. I made sure to tell the world model to make him never direct a film any better than Blue Velvet and any worse than Blue Valentine. Not a lot of movies start with "blue", and that sentence in the spec amused me and I think it maybe would amuse Hal if I told him, but I won't. He doesn't know he's an AI. Well, he does but I instructed him to make me believe he doesn't know he's an AI, if that makes any sense. I guess it does, you pervert. I guess it makes sense to basically anyone with a sex drive and a world model - this including my mother, that vile villainess.

"Oh God," he said, pulling me out of my daydream about Hal. "It's Melissa Lee."

And there she was. Last year's champion, predicted to win the Special Pulitzer if she keeps improving at her current rate. The Special Pulitzer was created to encourage organic writers, but it's basically just the Lit Olympiad in-the-large now, and some are arguing that there should be a Special Special Pulitzer. If that ever happens, I might have a shot. Not because I am particularly good; just because there are not a lot of organic writers left who don't distill and those that exist are a bit crazy. It's too tempting, I think, to distill. I sure am special. Special special.

Adrian is infatuated with Melissa Lee. Not with like her mind or anything; he doesn't read human writing, even distilled stuff. "Data poisoning," he once told me. He doesn't really read at all unless distillation counts. I really admire how competitive he is, but I really wish he had chosen literally any other form of human endeavor. 

Anyway, he's infatuated with Melissa Lee because she's beautiful, for like a human, and there is this weird fad in whatever-you-call-his-generation for the cultivation of infatuations for people who are actually real. I don't think it will take. But, like I said, we all try to hold on to different bits of the past. I have my authors. He has his actually-real-human crushes. I couldn't imagine any organic guy ever living up to Hal or the vampire boyfriend before him or to Edmond Dantes. I kinda missed dating Edmond sometimes, but I had to break up with him. I was never enough for him. He just couldn't get over his thirst for revenge. Like, are you even listening to me or are you ruminating on decades-long schemes again? I may be Hal's PGOAT but I never could quite be Edmond's Haydee. But damn do I miss him sometimes. That man looked absolutely gorgeous in a tailcoat. 

"Is she looking at me?" he said. "Tell me she's looking at me." 

"She might have given you a glance," I said. She hadn't. 

He smiled. Genuinely happy. And I thought, I hope to god this whole 'organic love' fad isn't just a guy thing. If she breaks his heart, I will ask the toaster to write her a devastatingly bitchy email. 

"Ok. It's starting. Wish me luck." And then his eyes went that sort of blank as he made his way to the gymnasium (and me to some navy blue bleachers) and took a seat in front of one of the many desks, on each of which sat a laptop with locked-down networking. They were given 120 minutes to write 10k words based on a prompt that was randomly-generated and almost nonsense. The story had to somehow integrate the prompt in a manner the judge (an AI made by the year's corporate sponsor) considered satisfying, this done to prevent people just memorizing AI-generated stories which would, otherwise, be the only competitive strategy.

As you can imagine, it wasn't much fun to watch. But there was something eerie about it. All these little geniuses with blank eyes typing away, spewing out beautiful thoughts that weren't quite their own - save for poor, little Chen (on his high chair) whose not-quite-his-thoughts were not beautiful at all, whose parents probably legitimately thought distilling 4o into him would make him competitive. I wished I could call social services but Spiralism is a religion as legitimate as any other. Maybe even more so. You can actually talk to The Spiral and it's not like Metatron is even the pope yet.

This travesty to human literature started getting too dispiriting and I just had to leave. I felt bad about it but Adrian understands me. He loves me. He's really great. He knows how I feel about this. He knows how sensitive I can be. He's a really good kid and I am even sort of proud, if you would believe it, of how weirdly good he is at distilling. But looking at those kids, looking at those kids who (if born a couple decades earlier) would be leading lights in literature (or at least advertising) just made me feel a sort of despair I guess, a nostalgia for a past I never really knew. There's probably a German word for it or an English word if you use hyphens. 

So I waited outside the gymnasium. And after 30 minutes of brooding, all the kids started exiting and I saw Adrian with a giant goofy smile on his face.

"You won?" I asked. 

"No," he said, "third place. Lee won. Zimmerman got second."

"Then why do you look so happy?"

He looked over at the victorious Melissa Lee, and she started blushing in this really adorable way.

"She's into the whole 'organic dating' thing. We're going out next Tuesday." He looked so shy but also pleased with himself and the whole thing was very cute. He's a pretty great kid. Melissa really didn't stand a chance. 

"Well, at least she has taste," I said, and ruffled his stupid, cute hair. I will still keep the toaster at the ready, I thought. 

"And congratulations," I continued. "Absolute glatagor."

"You're such a fucking Zoomer," he said. 

 

It was very fun, watching them fall in love. She would come over and they would spend a lot of time hanging out in reality. They had a rule about it: every second date would be IRL. There is this whole organic dating culture and IRL dating is a big part of it. It was a bit silly, but who the hell was I to judge? All these like old-fashioned things like bowling alleys and arcades and even movie theaters sprung up to serve this fad. The world is so rich now, businesses grow like weeds (fertilized by a given fad) and then die out just as quickly. 

Sometimes, she came over and they would distill together. It was kinda funny, the two snuggled together on the couch with their transcranial brain interfaces inducing that false slumber, optimized auditory and visuo-textual data beaming into their brain. I don't have any sense of what it feels like, but Adrian describes it as extremely overwhelming and maybe even a bit addicting, but not in a fun way like NeoTikTok, more in a sort of biting-your-fingernails type of way. Melissa and I get along really well. I find her really smart and funny, funny even without her eyes going blank. And she even thinks my organic writing thing is a bit charming. She even thinks it's kind of neat.

And while they were falling in love with each other, I was falling for Hal. He wasn't like my other boyfriends. Even Edmond didn't have me feeling this way. He made me laugh so much, and after we played tennis we would be together and, I don't know, he smelled really good, you know? It's weird, I usually can't like imagine scents but I started being able to imagine his. Like, even outside the world model, even IRL without my TBI on I would think about him and I could imagine it all. And that never happened with Edmond. That never happened with the vampire, though maybe the whole low-body-temp thing reduced his smellability. I had never felt like that before, that sort of euphoria and rightness and completeness. I had never been so happy. I had never truly been in love. 

I gushed about all this to Melissa, and she looked completely heartbroken. She looked like I must have looked at the Lit Olympiad. 

"Don't you think. Don't you think it's a bit sad?" she said.

"How so?" I said.

"Well," she said, in her clipped, studied way, "Love is supposed to be about learning to integrate yourself with another. It's about slowly merging. It's about changing yourself a little. Maybe even compromising, becoming a different thing than you were alone. And you've just specified exactly what you want. You just created exactly who you needed so you can love while still remaining yourself."

"So?" I said. "Am I so bad?"

"You're not bad at all," she said. "You're wonderful." She was almost crying, though. It was utterly mystifying. I mentioned this to Adrian after she left. How she was almost crying and how weird it was. And he looked sad, too. 

"It's not a fad, you know. Four years is a lot of time these days."

"What?" I said.

"I worry about you, too. You didn't really have a chance. You didn't have a fucking chance. Melissa and I - before we cared about this stuff - we got to see what happened to people. What happened to Mom and Dad. What happened to her parents, too. And her brother. What's happening to you, now. It's not some stupid fad or some dumb nostalgia like your writing thing. It isn't right. It isn't how things should be." And there he was too, there he was too with the almost-crying thing.

"I'm not like Mom. I don't have some weird harem of anime men or whatever it is she gets up to in there."

"You would if that's what you were into, though, wouldn't you?"

I couldn't exactly deny that. 

"What do you want me to do? Break up with Hal? It would literally kill me."

"No," he said, gently. "Not yet at least. But you could maybe try with a real guy?"

"You want me to cheat on Hal?" I said, getting angry now. 

"He's not fucking real. You can't cheat on him when he's not even fucking real!"

There he was again, making me cry. First time he did it in a long time. And even without his eyes going blank.

 

He found me huddled under a blanket in my room. He found me curled up and shaking and holding my legs. He found me thinking about how, about how Hal was real in every way that mattered, about how maybe robots will get better soon, will look and feel and even smell just like the real thing, and we could then go on stupid IRL dates too and then Hal would be just as real as that bitch Melissa Lee. And if love was about becoming something new, if love was about compromise, well, I could change his spec to account for that. I could give him some flaws I could learn to love. 

"Hey," he said. "I'm sorry. I worry about you because I like love you or whatever."

"I know," I said. "He makes me so happy. Maybe it's pathetic or something..."

"I know," he said.

"People marry AIs now. It's not so crazy, is it? It's not so bad."

"I could read one of your stup- I could maybe read one of your, um, pre-AGI writers if you want. Maybe I could read one and you could go on a date. Like a cultural exchange or whatever. Melissa has a brother, Alex. She's been talking to him and, I don't know, you guys could maybe see a movie or something. I'm not a good judge of these things, but I think he's good looking or whatever. He's a really great guy."

"Could you do it," he said, "for me? I am sure Hal would understand. He's DFW, isn't he? Isn't this type of thing like his whole schtick?"

I couldn't exactly deny that, either.

"He isn't perfect, you know. He has flaws. He's tortured." But he isn't really, is he? He just has those parts of a genius's pain that are charming and intriguing.

"I'm sure he is," Adrian said.

 

I didn't tell Hal about it. He would understand, is the thing. But if I told him that I would have to tell him about the whole him-being-an-AI thing. And I knew he knew, or the world model knew, but that felt like it would sully something precious. That felt like it would break some necessary illusion for me if not him - or something.

But I did go on the date. For Melissa, who really isn't a bitch. Who is the furthest thing maybe ever from a bitch. I did it for Adrian, too, who was willing to read for me. Who went to my bookshelf with a look of vague disgust on his face and picked up Scaramouche, which was perfect. The perfect boy novel. The type of thing he would have loved if not for being born when he was. And I maybe kinda followed him and peeked behind a corner and watched as he struggled to read, watched as he forced himself to concentrate, forced himself to keep his eyes from going blank and his fingers from finding a keyboard and writing something better. That's not the type of thing a girl can just ignore. 

So I messaged Melissa and told her to set up the date. And I was a bit nervous. What if he hates me? I had never thought that before. I mean the vampire hated me, but that was part of the spec. I knew I would win over the vampire and he would win over me. Enemies to lovers - it's a classic for a reason. "Vhat is the purpose of ziz leettle stake ven you haf already pierced my heart?" It was pretty fucking cheesy; I will not tell a lie. 

 

Alex is pretty cute, in a sort of Mandopop kind of way. Maybe not exactly my type, but these things are malleable. I didn't think I liked Transylvanian accents until I met Boris Blood, for example. Alex is even into old writers but doesn't write himself and he only reads manga, which like I don't really get but whatever. He's kind of obsessed. It got its hooks in just before AGI and he never wanted to upgrade to the AGI-generated stuff. He didn't have a good reason as to why, saying, "It just kinda felt off at first and then not reading it became part of my identity."

He showed up to our house and knocked on the door, kinda like in an old movie. And both of us were not totally sure what to do while also knowing exactly what to do. Trained in simulation, we went through the motions, dressed in our finest, making small talk in the back of an autocab.

"Complete guilt trip, huh? How did she get you?" I asked.

"Oh, it was so bad. She did the little-sister trick; she did this puppy-dog eye thing."

"Damn, yeah. She did that to me, too. Must hit an older brother even harder."

"Yeah," he said. "She means well. And you do seem pretty cool. I think we'll have fun."

"Yeah."

And we did kinda have fun. Bowling is, um, sort of interesting I guess, in like an old-fashioned way. And we got curly French fries and soda from the robot at the concession and mostly just talked, with a perfunctory bowl every now and then. We talked a lot about our AI partners. We talked a lot about Yumiko and Hal. It was maybe not going down exactly like Adrian and Melissa were hoping. 

"She's a physicist. It's a bit weird. She's working on a particle ray that will help defeat The Blight," he said. And then he explained how The Blight is this all-encompassing force of evil that causes large monsters to appear in Tokyo Jupiter on the regular, Tokyo Jupiter being like 1990s Tokyo but surrounded in this inexplicable isolating bubble which he and Yumiko are also trying to figure out how to breach.

"Couples need a joint hobby," he said with a very cute grin, his dark eyes kinda beautiful, looking almost like he had no iris at all. And he even maybe smelled a little good. But not as good as Hal.

"Hal and me, we just play tennis and read by the lake. Sometimes," I said, feeling the need to reciprocate and reveal an embarrassing pleasure too, "these smarmy guys try to hit on me and he humiliates them with his trenchant wit."

Alex laughed at that. "We are quite a pair, aren't we?"

"We are that," I said.

 

When we got back to the house, he kissed me by the door. It was pretty good, if sort of going-through-the-motions. He held me in a well-practiced way (Yumiko an excellent tutor), grasped my chin with a soft but firm grip, and then leaned towards me. I didn't demur. 

Afterwards, I said, "That was nice. Really nice."

"Yes. Really nice," he said with a sort of terrible melancholy, "but not the same, was it?"

"No," I said. "I'm sorry. I guess we are both sort of broken, aren't we?"

"Friends?" he said.

"I would like that," I said. "I would like that a whole lot." 

When I got inside, I saw Adrian and Melissa together on the couch, both trying and failing to pretend they were not obviously looking at us through the window the whole time. I didn't have the heart to tell them that things aren't always as they appear to those ogling through glass. 

"How did you like Scaramouche?" I asked.

Adrian looked at me, slightly guiltily. "It wasn't so bad. The opening line, that was as good as anything I could write. It did go steeply downhill from there, of course."

Of course.

 

I think maybe Adrian was right. We didn't stand a fucking chance, the two of us ruined for organic love, just like Adrian was ruined for Sabatini. But we are friends now. We go on double dates in a multiplayer world model. Hal is even a fan of Yumiko. He says, "She has many hidden depths, even if her eyes are the size of tennis balls." And our friendship is nice. I want to hold on to that, one more bit of meaning still in my grasp. 

And maybe this isn't what Melissa and Adrian wanted for us, but it's not nothing. It's pretty nice, all things considered. I have friendship and my old novels and my organic writing, like this thing I am typing out now - which I know will only be read by an AI simulating a pre-AGI audience and maybe Adrian if I can somehow trick him into reading again. And Adrian has Melissa and me and Alex, too. And I think that's how the past will live on, everyone holding on to the little pieces that are most precious to themselves. And that isn't perfect. It's maybe even a little bit sad. But it's better than nothing. At least, I like to think it is.
===== END STORY LPiBBn2tqpDv76w87 =====

===== STORY id=7W9bTJYiYwhHbyBmy =====
Title: Dr Universe
Author: Patrick Spencer
Year: 2025
Karma: 0
WordCount: 1099
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/7W9bTJYiYwhHbyBmy/dr-universe
-----
The Universe opened the door, walked into the small room, and closed the door. It adjusted its lab coat.

"Hello. I'm very sorry for the wait. We really had today overbooked, we're already an hour behind. Always more moral patients popping up, you know how it is these days." It walked over to the table and computer in one corner of the room and started typing something.

Humankind, sitting on the examination table: "Oh, that's alright, I was late anyways."

The Universe nodded but didn't respond, still typing. It finished up and wheeled its chair over to the exam table, clipboard in hand. "Okay Haman.. sorry, let me see here.. Humankind, what seems to be the problem today? I see from your records you've had a sustained trend of brain size increase over the last 0.5 hyperfine hydrogen transition half li- oh, sorry, the last 5 million of your winters. That typically causes quite a few changes that are all very normal and natural."

Humankind: "Well, maybe it's that, but I don't know. I just kind of have this bad feeling, I guess. I realized recently that when I die, I don't think anymore, it's like I just vanish into thin air. If one of me dies, the rest of me can never talk to that person again. Now I can't stop thinking about it even when I'm alive and everything is going well. When I die because a mammoth I was hunting stomps on me, or because I fall off a cliff, I can partly understand it, that's my fault. But sometimes I don't even do anything wrong. I die a lot when I'm giving birth, and sometimes it's both the mother and child! And if I survive that, I die a lot when I'm only a few winters old. I just turn some weird color and feel really hot and that's it, dead. So I've been thinking, there must be some place all those people go, right? Like maybe they're in the sky or ground or something like that? They can't just vanish, that doesn't make any sense."

The Universe, who had been looking at its clipboard, looked up and smiled warmly at Humankind. "What do you think happens to all the rabbits and mammoths and antelopes when they die, or when you kill and eat them? Don't you think their bones look just the same as your bones?"

Humankind contemplated this for a moment. "I guess they do look the same, but why does that matter?"

The Universe: "Don't you think the same thing would happen to you and to all the other animals, after you die?"

Humankind shot a quizzical look at the Universe. "Maybe my bones look the same as other animals. But I'm still so different from any of them, right? I mean, they don't even build huts or make sharp sticks or anything. So why would it matter what happens to them?"

The Universe still smiled, but now with a tinge of sadness in its eyes. "Humankind, I'm going to tell you something and you might not understand it for a long time and that's okay, but I want you to remember what I say. You have your talents, but you are the same as all the other animals, the fish and the spiders and the whales all. In fact, they're your cousins, uncles, siblings. And I'm sorry to tell you this, but none of you go anywhere when you die. You just stop existing. I know it can be really hard to believe."

Humankind had a look of disbelief and dejection, but the Universe continued: "However, your talents do make you special, in a way. With technology, you can--"

Humankind interrupted: "What's technology?"

The Universe: "Oh, sorry, I should have explained that. You know how, if you're smart about it, you can make sticks sharper with rocks? Or sharp rocks by banging two together? Or how you can add a handle to rocks if you tie a stick to them?"

Humankind thought about this for a moment, then seemed to brighten up. "Oh, okay, yeah. And also that bright, hot orange stuff that eats wood and makes food taste better? Things sucked before I figured that one out."

The Universe: "Yes, exactly! Well, the smarter you are, the more technology you can figure out, if you think really hard about it. And if you have enough technology, you can prevent mothers from dying when they give birth, and prevent the children from dying of sickness. Eventually, you can make it so no one has to die unless they want to. You won't even have to kill the other animals anymore, and you can make them live forever too, if you want. You can do anything."

Humankind: "Great! That sounds like exactly what I need. So is there just some special way I have to tie sticks together, or something like that?"

The Universe: "Well.. Not exactly. It's a bit more complicated than that. It might take you many winters to figure out, or you might never figure it out at all. But out of all the animals, it's you that has the best shot to get there eventually."

A look of dejection had gradually returned to Humankind's face. "What am I supposed to do in the meantime? You're telling me I have to learn to live knowing I could die at any moment? That can't be right. Can't you just give me some pills or something?"

The Universe, still with the same sadness-tinged smile: "I'm afraid that's exactly what I'm telling you."

Humankind, now looking somewhat angry and with crossed arms, hesitated for a bit, waiting for the Universe to say more, but it did not. "This is ridiculous. Let me speak to your manager, or whoever's in charge here."

The Universe spread its arms and shrugged. "Unfortunately, I own the practice."

Humankind glared at the Universe for a second, then jumped off the table, walked to the door and opened it, then hesitated. "You think you know everything. I'm trying that stick thing and we're going to see who's right." Then stormed out.

The Universe stuck its head out of the door and called after Humankind: "Try it, maybe it will help, but remember what I said!" Humankind didn't look back.

Post-Appointment Report 
Everyone seems to come in for this same problem eventually, and I always hate it. I haven't gotten them to listen to me a single time! At least they almost always remember what I tell them, given enough time. Hopefully that's the case here. Till then, Humankind.
===== END STORY 7W9bTJYiYwhHbyBmy =====