===== STORY id=Che7f4dDBDpPMGyxY =====
Title: Turning Grey
Author: Taylor G. Lunt
Year: 2025
Karma: 8
WordCount: 3285
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Che7f4dDBDpPMGyxY/turning-grey
-----
(Crossposted from my Substack; written as part of the Halfhaven virtual blogging camp.)

 

She wasn’t ready, but the man started speaking. “Hello, Ms. Tatsuo. My name is Ethan Blande from the Public Health Agency of Canada. I wanted to ask you some questions because I’m told you were the first to report symptoms.” The man was dressed in a suit and wore and N95 mask over his stubble.

Ai nodded, but didn’t speak. She was still short of breath from having gone to the washroom connected to her hospital room. At least she was still able to go by herself. Some of the other patients had come into the hospital later than her, but had already turned fully grey.

“At what time did the symptoms start? How long before you came into the hospital?”

“About… ten minutes before,” gasped Ai. “I came… right away.”

“Okay,” said Ethan, typing a note on his laptop, which rested on the adjustable overbed table. “And what were the initial symptoms?”

“I first noticed… the grey eyes. Even my irises…” The man waited for her to continue, but seemed impatient. “Then I heard… the voices. Muffled… I still can’t hear what they… what they’re saying.”

“One patient described the voices like an alien radio station. Do the voices seem to be human voices, or something else?” asked Ethan.

Ai felt anger in her chest. Why was this man asking her stupid questions? Was he as clueless as everyone on the internet? She hoped the Public Health Agency would have some answers, but apparently not, if they were chasing alien stories. “Sound human… to me,” said Ai firmly.

The man wanted to ask her more questions, but one of the nurses, a stern older woman named Violeta, ushered the man away so Ai could rest for a while. She gave Ai a puff of a bronchodilator — albuterol — using an inhaler. Ai noted the dose and the timing in a spreadsheet on her phone. She’d been tracking every drug she’d taken since becoming pregnant. That was doubly important now that she was sick.

A while after her breathing returned to normal, Shirley, a chipper health care aide, brought a tray into the room. Her pink uniform carried an assortment of pastel-coloured baubles, including a little, ineffectual pair of pink scissors. Her hair was done up with a big bow holding it together, like Minnie Mouse.

“Ding ding ding! Good afternoon, Ai! I hope you like burgers!” She set the tray down on the table. “Oh, you have some blood, let me clean you up!” she chirped, wiping blood from Ai’s mouth. Ai stared blankly at the lifeless hospital burger.

“I always feel like burgers have too much bread, y’know?,” said Shirley. “But another patient came up with a brilliant idea! If you throw away the bottom bun, you get more of the condiments and meat in each bite. I call it an ‘urger’. Because you’re missing part of the burger…” Shirley’s voice trailed off when she realized Ai was glaring at her. “Okay, just let me know if you need anything! Toodles!” Shirley skipped her way out of the room in her pink crocs. Ai would have rolled her eyes if she weren’t so exhausted. Instead, she started watching the news on the hospital room TV, picking at her burger without really eating it. She hoped the pain in her belly wasn’t coming from her womb.

 

Ai sipped apple juice as she watched the TV in the corner. No matter the time of day, the news was about her disease. The “Greyscale Disease” — so called because its victims looked like they were straight out of a black and white film — had infected over 800 people in Toronto and thousands elsewhere in the last six days. Experts on the news argued about the nature of the disease. It didn’t seem to be a bacterium or virus. Some said it could be a prion or parasite, but the nasally man on the screen was insisting it was an environmental contaminant.

People in more advanced stages of the disease had lost limbs, but nobody had died so far. That was the one saving grace. Nobody yet knew if Greyscale was lethal. Ai herself hadn’t lost any limbs or fingers, but the disease continued to get worse. Her entire body was grey, now. And unless she slowly sipped apple juice, there was an ever-present taste of blood in her mouth. She had even bled from her eyes. The doctors wanted to give her drugs to control the bleeding, but it wasn’t profuse, and nobody knew what the effects of such drugs could be on a mystery disease.

Shirley peeked into the room and let Ai know it was time to take her pills.

“I’m not taking them! You can tell that to Dr. Wahid!” Ai shouted after her, but the woman was already gone. “I don’t need painkillers, I need DMSA!” She had read about some patients with Greyscale online claiming to have improved their colour after taking dimercaprol, and DMSA worked similarly to filter toxins from the blood, but was safer for pregnant women.

“Hey!” Ai shouted, getting out of bed. She felt lightheaded, and pain spiked in her belly, but she was determined not to let Shirley get away. It could be hours before she saw the doctor again unless she sent Shirley to fetch her.

Other patients might be content to wait for the lazy hospital staff to do their job, but if you wanted better outcomes than other people, you had to be more cautious than other people, and in the hospital, that meant being proactive.

She stepped out of her room and tried to yell after Shirley, but instead felt liquid spill from her mouth. The ever-present voices in her head grew louder. She suddenly felt faint.

 

The hospital was crowded with Greyscale patients, so they were doubling up on rooms. Ai had hoped the new patient would at least be able to keep her company, but the man — an elderly man named Gill — was in pain and wouldn’t respond to anyone except to moan and occasionally shout for more pain meds. He had been hit hard by the disease. He lost an arm and a foot. They didn’t fall off, but seemed to shrivel back into his body. And though he looked underweight, he was unnaturally heavy. It had taken three health care aides to lift him from the wheelchair into his bed. Ai could feel the same heaviness in her bones. It wasn’t just weakness. The Greyscale patients were getting physically heavier somehow, in apparent defiance of physics.

When Ai looked at him, she saw her own future, which filled her with terror for herself and her baby. She knew there must be someone, somewhere who had found some kind of treatment to at least slow the disease, and so she spent her time searching news articles, journals, and even reddit looking for anything that could help.

There were many stories about the progression of the disease, which only served to scare her further. First, the voices and the grey skin. Then bleeding, shortness of breath, and heaviness. Hair starts retracting into the body. Then more bleeding. By that point, even the blood is grey. Fingers start retracting into the body. Eyes and noses, sometimes. Limbs. Still, nobody had died.

Equally useless were the conspiracy theories. People saying Greyscale was an attack from China, or some kind of alien first contact gone awry. No doubt the voices contributed to that theory. Ai’s own voices were louder now, but still indistinct, like someone talking in a shrill voice. Ai couldn’t make out any actual words.

Most promising were the many stories of treatments working, though most were quickly debunked. Still, people online recommended all manner of treatments: deferoxamine, an experimental peptide, a medicinal herb, or a prayer. Ai was skeptical of them all and feared taking random treatments without knowing how they could affect the disease, but cataloged them all in a spreadsheet. She would take anything if it would protect her baby, but random treatments could just as easily make her condition worse.

Still, every few hours she would grow desperate and demand Shirley get her the doctor. She would ask for this or that drug or supplement, and the doctor usually refused. When they did oblige, she often didn’t take the pills, having changed her mind. She was obsessed with protecting her baby, but paralyzed by fear of doing something wrong. Somehow, she couldn’t shake the idea that she’d already done something wrong. That if she’d only eaten healthier or exercised more, maybe she wouldn’t have gotten the disease in the first place.

Despite her obsession, she continued to get worse, and the pain in her belly grew.

 

Something hit Ai in the head. “Ma’am, wake up!” Gill croaked.

Ai looked over at him, then at the floor. He’d thrown a shoe at her. Before she could protest, he nodded excitedly toward the TV. “Look!”

There was a breaking news report. “Cure for Greyscale Found.” The newscaster announced that a small company from Texas called Chronic Systems had reversed the symptoms of one patient in Texas. The unlikely company was a physics research company, rather than a pharmaceutical one. Ai dismissed it as yet another fake cure, but apparently the CDC was taking it seriously and said they were rushing to have the treatment available to patients within the next 72 hours.

Gill looked at her with eyebrows raised. He was hard to look at, as the disease had taken one of his eyes. Rather than disappoint him with her skepticism, Ai just shrugged.

 

The Public Health Agency of Canada was working with the American CDC to get the treatment to every Greyscale patient. The treatment Ai now held in her hands. It was a small metal device shaped like a pill, suspended inside a specialized glass vial stamped with the name “Chronic Systems”. The pill was apparently somewhat radioactive, and had to be transported in these protective vials. She turned it in her hands, ruminating.

Gill had taken the treatment two hours ago. If she wasn’t mistaken, his colour was improving. But she couldn’t be sure. Even without the treatment, Greyscale patients sometimes had their symptoms improve temporarily, only to get worse later. It was a risk, and she wanted to wait and see if it worked for other patients before taking it herself. She had a baby to worry about. But if she waited too long, that might be just as bad.

She felt wetness between her legs and knew she’d just lost control of her bowels again. It would be mostly blood. Grey blood. She was mortified. Just in time, the obnoxious health care aide Shirley skipped into the room. “Don’t worry,” she said, “I’ll get you cleaned up!”

Ai rolled to her side and tensed as Shirley changed her diaper and cleaned the mess. The disposable wipes were cool on her colourless skin. The chemical smell wiped away the metallic smell of her bloody, grey feces.

“There you go!” The woman’s happy voice was like nails on a chalkboard. “Let me know if you need anything else, okay?”

Ai stayed on her side. “Just leave me alone.”

 

Ai woke in the middle of the night, feeling the urge to defecate again. This time, she managed to hold it. Hoping not to make another mess for Shirley, she got out of bed. Her heavy feet hit the ground with a thud. She grasped her walker. One of her fingers had shriveled into her hand, but she didn’t have time to dwell on it.

As quickly as she could, she shuffled to the toilet. She felt lightheaded, and her breathing was heavy. She noticed her shadow seemed to follow her with a delay, which made her uneasy. She made it in time, though her belly screamed with pain. The voices seemed louder than ever, though she still couldn’t understand what they were saying.

She was concerned with the amount of blood coming from her. Maybe she should have been taking the medications to help with bleeding. Figuring out what was safe and what wasn’t was impossible, and she couldn’t trust the doctors to do it. Not when medical errors were one of the leading causes of death.

As she stood up from the toilet, her head swam. She shuffled to the sink, where she realized she’d left the vial with the metal pill. She didn’t remember bringing it into the bathroom with her.

In the mirror was a healthy Ai, with normal skin and long black hair. Not the grey and bald woman she really was. The Ai in the mirror was smiling. Happy. The reflection of the vial in the mirror was empty. She picked up the vial to examine the metal pill inside. Her reflection did the same, though only after a short delay.

Ai started trembling with fear. Something was wrong. Was she hallucinating? The incessant voices in her head were deafening, but still, she couldn’t understand what they were saying.

She turned to call for help, but there was a stabbing pain in her stomach. A kick, she realized. From the baby.

Suddenly, she was able to place the voices. They weren’t coming from her head at all, but from her womb. Muffled through all the flesh, it was her baby, begging her. Screaming at her to take the pill.

Ai’s shaking hands dropped the vial, which shattered on the tile floor. The metal pill came to rest between glass shards. She bent down to pick it up. The effort made her gasp for breath.

She swallowed the pill. She nearly choked on it, but she got it down. She lie down on the ground to catch her panting breath, not caring about the shards of glass cutting into her calves. The pill was inside her now. Maybe it was a horrible mistake, or maybe she’d just saved her life. The uncertainty was like a long, black night.

 

The cure worked. Ai felt nearly back to her normal self after a few days, aside from the missing finger, which would never return. Her baby was healthy, too. Gill had already gone home earlier that day, and she would be going home in a few hours.

She knew she should be relieved. But she was not. It had all been so random. She couldn’t point to a time when she had made a mistake, or done anything right. She had behaved essentially at random, and it all worked out for no reason.

Another breaking news broadcast was starting just as Shirley hopped into the room. She was wearing scrubs featuring Tweety Bird in a repeating pattern. “Breaking news? What’s that?”

“I don’t know,” said Ai, hoping Shirley wouldn’t keep talking over the news report.

The news report showed the CEO of Chronic Systems in handcuffs. Ai’s heart sank. Was something wrong with the cure?

The newscaster spoke. “Bharat Ashwin, CEO of Chornic Systems, arrested just a few hours ago in connection with the Greyscale Disease epidemic. Experts from the CDC say his company’s illegal physics research may have been the original source of the disease which his company later cured. We go now to Ethan Blande from the Public Health Agency of Canada for comment.”

Ai looked at Shirley, whose eyes were wide, and mouth clearly agape under her mask. As usual, the woman’s reactions to everything were exaggerated and unnecessary.

Ethan Blande appeared on the screen. “We are working with the American FBI in the arrest of Mr. Ashwin. The discovery was made after one of our analysts noticed that not a single patient refused treatment in Canada. We reached out to the CDC and found the same thing was true for American patients. This is unheard of for a patient population this size. Further investigation into the company’s activities revealed that they had been studying exotic time physics, and internal documents relating to their so-called cure showed it contained something called ‘temporal antibodies’. The company’s own documents indicate they believe the disease itself to have been caused by the cure, even though the cure is taken after the disease already sets in. Without their so-called miracle cure, the disease itself would never have occurred.”

“What does that mean?” asked Shirley. “The cure fixed the disease in the present, but went back and time and made you sick in the first place?”

“That’s what he said. Can’t you listen?” snapped Ai. But Shirley was right. It didn’t make any sense.

“Thank you Mr. Blande,” said the newscaster. “Bharat Ashwin is being charged with criminal negligence, though his lawyer claims that Mr. Ashwin could not have forseen or avoided this unprecedented ‘closed causal loop’, as he calls it. Mr. Ashwin himself declined to comment. Just a few minutes ago, Michio Kaku tweeted about this unprecedented-“

Shirley turned off the TV. “That’s enough of that. Are you ready for your breakfast?” Just like that, the woman was ready to move past a revelation that shook Ai’s conception of reality.

“How can you just start talking about breakfast, just like that? Did you hear what he said?” Ai grilled. “Do you have any conception of what he just said? I was sick with a disease that went back in time! The cure for the disease is what made me sick! If I had resisted taking the cure, would I never have gotten sick in the first place? Or would I have always taken the cure, no matter how hard I tried not to? This makes no sense! Is any of it even true? How does this not bother you? Are you too vapid, too empty-headed to understand? Do you just not care?”

Shirley stood frozen for a minute, then let out a heavy sigh. “Ai, did you have any of the other health care aides wash you while I wasn’t working? They were rough, right? Like they didn’t care?”

Ai nodded. She was right. Shirley did a good job, but some of the others were like barbarians, rushing so they could get to the next patient. Leaving her not feeling fully clean.

“I take my time. I like to make sure people are clean. And happy, if possible. Sometimes I meet some really nice people here. And sometimes those people die. Then I go home and I cry. But the next day, I come back here wearing my Tweety Bird scrubs and I try to put a smile on people’s faces. Do you know why?”

Ai was feeling guilty, and spoke softly. “To make patients more comfortable?”

“Yes, but it’s not just for them, it’s for me, too. You can’t control life, but you can choose your attitude. You can choose to smile in the face of a hurricane. You can say to life, ‘bring it on!’” Shirley balled her hand into fists, and seemed to be challenging the universe itself.

Ai felt ashamed for insulting her. Maybe wasn’t as shallow as she seemed. Maybe Shirley had some things figured out that Ai herself still needed to work on. Especially if she wanted to do a good job raising her baby. Ai looked down at her belly. “I hope I’ll be a good mother.”

“You will!” Shirley assured her. “I can tell you care. That’s the most important thing. Now, how about I get you and your baby,” she patted Ai’s belly, “some breakfast?”

Ai nodded. “Okay.”

“I can’t hear you!”

“Okay!” Ai said more loudly, and smiled.
===== END STORY Che7f4dDBDpPMGyxY =====

===== STORY id=NPWKAFsDYtfY4zw5Z =====
Title: Brand New Experience Salesman
Author: Screwtape
Year: 2025
Karma: 17
WordCount: 693
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/NPWKAFsDYtfY4zw5Z/brand-new-experience-salesman
-----
(Part of a short story collection based around a prompt. The prompt was 'selling memories or experiences.')

“We at Glimpse scout and curate first time experiences.” Stan gave his new potential customers his winning smile, straight from the highway billboards, hiding the desperation to make a sale. “You want to be the first, and we provide that. A world record, guaranteed.” 

The customers looked like a typical family. Husband, gone a little to seed. Wife, clutching his arm and doubtful. Boy stuck on his phone, texting furiously, wearing a black shirt that said “Who cares?”

“Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay were the first people to climb Mount Everest. Imagine that. Being the first human being in history to stand on such a desolate and lonely place on earth, seeing the horizon from a perspective nobody else ever had. Of course, now over seven thousand people have climbed Everest. It’s no longer such a badge of distinction, you could fill an auditorium with them. There were no heights left to summit.” They were all rich too, a condition Stan envied and counted on his customers to envy too.

Stan let his prepared patter roll off his tongue. He’d really practiced the energy in that pitch, and the carefully honed dismissal of seven thousand. He had the father of the family standing in his shop hooked, he could tell, but he’d have to work to reel in the rest of the family.

“Fifteen years later that was proved false of course! Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the moon, climbing to a height that made Everest look like a molehill. It was a new experience for anyone. They were the first. Everyone remembers their names, but who remembers the fifth man on the moon? Not you, not me. Nobody really. That’s why Glimpse can guide you to a First Experience nobody else has done yet.”

The wife spoke first. “That really seems dangerous.”

The kid snorted. “That sounds like hype.”

Talk past the sale. Stan nodded sagely, projecting as much warmth and understanding as his garish tie and striped suit jacket would allow. “It can be, but you’ll see once you make your purchase that the utmost care is put into safety, and there are first experiences in our catalogue that are a natural fit for your caution.”

“First person to go hot air ballooning in diving gear. First person to ride the New York Subway with two tarsiers on their head. Those were our trips, and both made Guinness Book of World Records. Unbroken records for almost a decade now!” 

It helped to have a man working at Guinness of course. Stan spent hours with the man coming up with ridiculous firsts that could be talked up and sold as guided, one of a kind experiences, and hours more plying his inside man with drinks on Stan’s tab. And of course there was a reason the records were unbroken- nobody else cared to break them.

Stan noticed the kid was losing focus. “Or take Minecraft. There’s a bunch of different ways to be the first in Minecraft, like Rattles being the first person to beat the dragon in under three minutes. KurtJMac has traveled the farthest though, wandering all the way to the far lands without mods or cheats. Both of them had a new experience.” That was about as much time as he could spend on the non-purchaser, and not coincidentally was just about all of the Minecraft knowledge he knew.

The kid rolled his eyes at Stan. “Why do you do this for a living? There’s gotta be jobs that aren’t as lame.”

Stan fixed his grin on his face, ignoring the brat. Foot in the door, go from there.

“You can try it out with our small records catalogue. Nothing too challenging. Of course, once you get a taste for fame, you may find you want a little more. . .” The husband nodded, interested enough to read the catalogue. Neither of the family members stopped him. 

Glimpse was the best service of its kind. Stan would know- after all, Glimpse was the first and only one of its kind.
===== END STORY NPWKAFsDYtfY4zw5Z =====

===== STORY id=ySoNM6ParKrLRxCAZ =====
Title: Lobsang's Children
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2025
Karma: 58
WordCount: 6915
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/ySoNM6ParKrLRxCAZ/lobsang-s-children-1
-----
I study so hard. My grandfather makes me. It is not fun. My life is studying. I am home-schooled. I don't have much freedom. Grandfather says it is important that I learn Chinese in both its modern and classical forms. I like to think I am smart, but I am not a genius. I have to work really hard to keep up with Grandfather's desires, while also doing well on the state-mandated exams. And I do pretty well. 

I write in English now because it's mine. It's what I learned for the state exams and not for him. Grandfather is dismissive of English even though he's really good at it, better than me, but he buys me novels and things so I do well. It would upset his pride if I did poorly. And though I love Chinese and I respect my Grandfather, Chinese isn't mine. It is his. Those parts of my mind that love it are his, I guess I feel. And I respect him. And I, I can't even write it. I don't think kind things about him sometimes. I feel a sort of rage.

He doesn't let me use the internet. We only have books and a piano. I don't even get to go outside much. I love the piano. I taught myself how to play with the books that are in the bench. It's maybe my favorite thing. I wish I had friends. I guess you're my friend, my new little journal.

In books, I read about other children and they don't seem like me. They get to go outside more and play and talk and I don't really do those things. I read English novels and Chinese novels and classic Chinese poems and books on strategy and Confucian philosophy and Buddhist philosophy and all the philosophies he thinks are important. I feel sometimes like he wants me to be a past person. I feel sometimes he doesn't love me at all. Like I am an experiment and not his grandchild, but I don't see of what kind.

It doesn't make any sense. Maybe he wants to turn me into him. Maybe one day you will find him writing his thoughts in you, but it will be with my hand and my brain. And the parts of me that want to play the piano and with other children will be gone. It made me really sad, writing that.

I am sorry about the tears that fell on you. I am sorry to have marked you with my sadness. I like to think of you as a cheerful journal. And a pretty one. Pretty like the girl I used to play with years ago, who used to sneak into our yard. Her name was Susan. She had blonde hair and she would laugh and when she laughed I laughed and I don't even know how to write how it felt either. Even less than the rage. But it was really nice. It was maybe the best feeling I have ever felt. And I felt it every day before Grandfather got mad. Before he yelled at her. The things he said to her in his really, really good English. I can't even write what I felt then. I can't even write about a lot of the things inside me. It was maybe the first time I really knew the rage I mentioned. I am crying again. I am sorry. 

I have to go now. Try to dry off. Get back to your happy self. I will say you cried with me. That they are your tears, too. And our tears are maybe mixed together. I will dry myself off like you will. I will play the piano after studying today. I will be happy when we meet again. Happy like I imagine you are when I don't make you cry, my little journal, my only friend.

 

You know there is a box in the cellar. It's strange. And there is this machine next to it. I don't know what it is. I can't find it in my books and I can't ask him, because he doesn't know I followed him and watched him a couple times.  He puts water into it every week. A little timer goes off on his watch and he puts water into it, but it's not from the sink. It's special water he buys from the store. I know why it is different. I worked it out. It is distilled like alcohol. 

In Robinson Crusoe there is a scene with a still, and I remember looking up what a still is in an encyclopedia. In some of my books the kids use computers and that sounds way easier. But I love my encyclopedias. They're kinda like my friends too, but I don't talk to them. So maybe you're not my only friend like I said yesterday, but you're my best friend except for Susan.

Anyway, a still is a machine for boiling things and leaving other things behind. And there must be something in tap water he doesn't want in his machine, so he buys this distilled water and he pours it into this machine. And the machine has a little hose that goes into the box, and there is another hose going out and that just has air coming out of it. And this hose is very thin and clear. So I think the machine pushes air into the box, if that makes sense. I don't know why. I wish I knew what it was called. I bet it is in one of my encyclopedias. 

But next to the box are these old letters. They are just sitting there on the floor, but I can't take them because he will notice. He notices things. He always notices everything. They are letters to my father. I could see that but I had to leave because he came home. Grandfather goes to the store every Thursday and to the bank after that to cash his pension check. Even though in novels people do that kind of thing on computers, he uses the mail. Next time he goes, I will go down there and bring you and copy one.

 

 My Son,
 
 It is the greatest joy of a father to experience, through the eyes of his son, those things which brought him wonder in his youth. And nothing so captured my mind, nothing so enraptured my soul, as our grand family ambition. And I cherished the prospect of a discourse between us on The Asides, which I imagined you reading first to gain understanding, which I imagined we would debate at length before you would begin to learn those meditations denied to us writers, before you would undertake the culmination of so many lifetimes.
 
 It was just before your fifth birthday that I partook, as writers do each year of their lives, in the graphomanic meditations and, afterwards, the meditation on culmination - which allowed me to see, definitively, the work would be completed in my lifetime but would take me at least twenty more years. And this, then, would make you a lacuna in the text, and your cleverest son the True Reader. And I fear this disappointment caused me to neglect your education. I fear a sort of depression in my secret heart made me too-easily leave such matters in your mother's hands, your mother who, for all her many virtues, is more Canadian than Chinese, and cares little for our obligation to our ancestors.
 
 I feel I was a good father. I feel I loved you and you loved me, and we have many happy memories between us. But in this matter, I have betrayed you. I can only beg you to forgive me. I can only beg you to continue, in the manner available to you, the great work of our family. 
 
 You will find waiting for you here that great scroll to which I have referred in my past letters and, also, detailed instructions I have written on the manner of your son's education. Come and I will give them to you. It also includes a letter I have written to Jason, whom I love as much as I love you. In the event I die before his completion, please give it to him just before he begins studying the meditations of coalescence. 
 
 Do as your father instructs, I implore you. Honor this request.

 

There, I copied it down into you. I was really careful to get it exact. It took a while. I don't really understand it all but I guess we know what is in the box. It is a scroll. And I guess scrolls need special wet air. And that is what the machine does, I bet. It makes the air wet. And wet with water that doesn't have whatever is in tap water scrolls don't like.

It made me feel good, knowing he loves me. I never heard him say that. I worry maybe the person he was when he wrote that isn't him anymore. But what does he mean by my completion? I feel incomplete sometimes. I feel less like a person than the people in my books. I don't know if that makes any sense. I think maybe people need more than just a grandfather and a piano.

In the books the characters are sort of made of more than just themselves. They are made up of themselves but also the way they fit in between other people. And I guess that part of me isn't very large. My surface area is low. I miss Susan. And I don't even remember her much anymore. I remember she made me laugh. I remember crying when he finally let me into the yard again. And he let me go there because they had moved away and she was gone. That is why he let me back out, I think. Even though he said it was a reward for memorizing all of Du Fu's poems.

And I worked really hard on that because, because I thought maybe I would be able to look at her through the cracks in the fence even if we would never talk again. And I think, I think he knew that's why I was working so hard. I think he knew the whole time. And then when I recited all the poems perfectly, and then I wrote them all down perfectly, too, even if I maybe didn't fully understand them. And I was happy again. It was a full happiness. It felt like one of my best days. It was like a happiness from the future hugging my heart.

And then when I looked into the yard, I saw people that were not her parents. Old, ugly people and a mean dog. And I knew she was gone and I would never see her again. And it was the worst day, it turned out. And my heart was strangled. And I became a bit numb on my insides. I am still a bit numb, I think. And it helps me study. But it makes me incomplete, like Grandfather said in the letter. I will find more letters. We will think about them together. 

I have to go, again, and study.

 

I found a very long letter in the pile. It is about the scroll. I have not read the whole thing but I read a little before I heard Grandfather open the garage.  It is also to my father. I think they all are.  There are only ever letters to my father, never his responses. I wonder if he maybe replied by email and Grandfather by letter. This seems like the sort of thing Grandfather would do.

Grandfather does have a computer he never uses. I wonder if it was just to hear from dad before he died, before he died and Grandfather got his letters back. It is very strange. Next time you feel my pen it will be copying it. And maybe you can think about it with me, my little friend. 

I have been thinking and I will name you Susan, if that is ok and not "my little friend." Susan. I think you need a name and I love you and I think I loved her. It is the only thing I have felt which feels like the thing in my books where they talk about a lightness in your insides. And I feel it for you and her and my piano sometimes. And I will call you Susan from now on. And not 'little journal'.

 

 Your grandfather wrote, and his father before that, on a scroll I now keep in a large, humidified box in my cellar, a scroll I once wrote on, too - though you have never seen me do so. Your grandfather had a room for it, and I often envied it for this, as its room was much larger than my own. His father built a little temple for it on his humble property. This he constructed with the elegant, glueless joinery he first monetized in a workmanlike way and then in the manner of an artist. As the introduction of western methods changed the nature of his trade, he preferred to work in the traditional way and became (to achieve this) an artist of no small renown. And his sculptures peopled (and still people) the mansions of many of the great Taiwanese capitalists who transformed his impoverished isle into an industrial power. 
 
 I was told by him (and later read in the work itself) that there was once a prince who built a whole second palace just for this scroll. And this palace was the finest house it ever had, for the prince's father kept it in a grand temple, and his grandfather a gilded hall and so on and so on, its homes and their furnishings ever humbler until we reach its place of birth: a small monastery in southern Tibet, its first author one Lobsang. 
 
 Lobsang begins the strange work by describing a preparation for a glue he had devised, a combination of boiled yak hide and tree resin, which is especially suited for joining shog-shing - a strange brownish paper made from the bark of Daphne shrubs, which each generation goes to some lengths to acquire. And when not possible (it is related in various asides) other papers were used but always with a plea to the next generation to replace these sections by copying their work onto the traditional material. 
 
 And in each case, this was done. And so the work remains in the state Lobsang prescribes. And Lobsang was wise in choosing shog-shing, though there were few alternatives in his time, for it is renowned for its fibrous durability and even the oldest sections remain pliant and would still make able palimpsests - though even writing this sentence fills me with a terrible guilt.
 
 I have not read Lobsang directly, for he wrote in Classical Tibetan, but many generations down one Wenxuan spent much of his life translating the work from the original Classical Tibetan to Classical Chinese, and thus the text has within it two copies of its first section. Lobsang, in his sagacity, anticipated such a thing might happen and prescribed a bemused toleration for these redundancies. 
 
 It is his translated glue recipe which is referred to by later generations when (as they sometimes do) they write of manners pertaining to the maintenance of the vessel of this great work. The form and procedure for asides was formalized in 1136 by the great general Yue Fei, who gifted the scroll his best horse, so it could join him on his many campaigns. This was an act of great recklessness often chastised by those who came after, but it speaks to Fei's influence on the asides that before his descendants criticize him they announce themselves in the fashion he originated.  
 
 Fei marked his transitions from the textual to the metatextual with a poem of his own composition. Knowing how I have neglected your education in the language of my birth, let alone the ancient form in which the poem is written, I include below a translation of my own:
 
 
 In the temple, war's counterpoint 
 My arm marred by a healing wound. 
 Wrathful words - I chew and swallow 
 My face still as stone. 
 I am among silent spirits. 
 With my left hand, I touch them, 
 My right is half-spirit, 
 and holds a brush. 
 It writes with its human half.
 
 And so post-Fei each aside begins with an untitled poem, every author having (as you can imagine) wildly varying talents. The poems vary greatly, too, in length. The longest is over ten thousand Chinese characters. But they all end (without exception) with those final five lines Fei used in the first example of the form.
 
 This tradition, which Lobsang did not dictate, has developed its own sort of historical weight. And it is clear to every writer that to break with it would be a sin almost as large as running afoul of Lobsang's dictates, which none has yet violated.
 
 And having been honored with the privilege of finishing the work, I now know none ever will.

 

Hey, Susan. The letter is very long. I could not copy it all down. It is very strange. But I copied this important bit, and I will copy more. I don't have a lot of time. And I guess I want to read it with you. I want to copy it and read it with you and not just read the whole thing alone.

It's a bit like that time we played detective. I don't know if you remember it, but I remember it. It was silly. You liked those stupid girl books, remember? Harriet the Spy. And I told you they were silly and the mysteries were boring but then we played Harriet the Spy and I tried to set up a little mystery for you and I remember you solved it and I realized you were cleverer than Harriet, as clever as Huckleberry Finn maybe, and maybe that's why you made me laugh so easily. And I could never make you laugh as much. But I think I needed it more than you, the laughing. And I think you knew that, maybe. And this is part of the kindness in you I love. 

I am sorry. I got distracted again and started crying. I guess it must feel like rain to you. I think we should focus on the mystery. And this scroll. It seems kinda cool, hey? It's very old and is part of my family. It seems a bit like Grandfather. Powerful and scary. And probably wrinkly, too. 

The Fei poem seems very wrong. It does not seem like what he would write. I wish I could read the scroll and see it in Chinese. But I can sort of imagine what it must have been to be translated as it was. Especially if I imagine Grandfather translating it. And Fei wasn't like that at all in the poems I have read. He was very proud and strong and manly. He is like a boy-type hero. You would hate him. I love him and admire him but I always thought we were very different. But maybe he was like me with a secret self. And he had poems in him that were maybe not so stoic. It makes me admire him more, if true. It is maybe like he proves you can be brave even if you cry on your journal sometimes.  

I have to go now. I don't have to but I have my other friend, remember? The piano. I need to spend a little time with him. I will copy more of the letter soon.

 

 After detailing his means of extension and the generations-long ambition of the then-infant work, Lobsang begins the first of what he calls, in my clumsy translation, The Preambles, in which he expounds upon those methods of introspection which, as far as I can tell in my many years of study, are wholly original to him and can be found nowhere else in recorded human thought. 
 
 The techniques amplify those parts of the mind that ruminate on (and, Lobsang argues, make transcendent) the internal strivings whose unification he sees as the highest level of cultivation. Lobsang's unity - or "liberation" - is not of the form of his contemporaries and is almost proto-Nietzschean. It would be more accurate to dispense with the temporal and describe Nietzsche as a proto-Lobsang.
 
 Nietzsche (lacking the tools of self-understanding Lobsang learned in his monastic life) could only gesture at, if with unusual precision, what Lobsang endeavored to engineer and considered intrinsically disparate what Lobsang longed to make coherent and whole. That is to say, within a man there are many drives which are always partially at odds.  And Lobsang desired to mediate between and ultimately unify them. To put it in western terms, he wished to refine rather than transcend the human ego.

 

Susan, I skipped some stuff, but copied a lot today. The letter starts with Grandfather explaining how he needs to explain the text, as father could not read Chinese. And he wanted my father to understand things. It's funny how he mentions this in both letters. It haunted him, I think. Anyway, I skipped that stuff.

What I copied, it's a bit dense, isn't it? I guess I am kind of used to that. I didn't know who Nietzsche was. I looked him up in an encyclopedia. There was a picture. And he looks a little funny. If you were fully here, you would make a joke about his mustache and I would do that thing you made me do where I would laugh and then laugh about laughing and all the things that hurt inside me would feel very far away. He has a silly mustache and his eyes are almost like the eyes in the cartoons in Grandfather's newspaper. His life was a bit sad. It was kind of like mine. He was blind and alone and then he went insane. Hopefully I don't go insane. I will be sure to never grow a mustache when the time comes that I have this option. 

The article mentioned something called the Übermensch, and I guess that is what grandfather was saying was similar to what Lobsang wanted. It said the Übermensch is a person who is special in that he creates his own, superior values. And this seems a bit similar to what Grandfather wrote of Lobsang. 

Anyway, think about it maybe. You're the truly clever one. I will try to copy more soon. But I have more poems to memorize. There are so many poems in my head now I wonder how they can all fit. But I seem to remember them even as I add more. Grandfather is pleased with me. 

I have to go. The piano is missing me. And I try to be a kind friend, like you always are.

 

You remember the first letter I copied into you? You remember the bit at the end? He said he mentioned he had a message for me, a letter my father was supposed to give me in the event of Grandfather's death. I found it. I, I have that thing again where I am feeling things I don't know how to write down. It is a sort of happy-sadness that is new to me. I have it here. I am in the cellar now, flashlight in hand. And I am going to copy it. My grandfather prepared for a future where he died. He was expecting father to raise me. He was not expecting my parents to die. It's almost like those novels with forking futures and I am seeing a could-have-been.

You will understand soon. And we will talk about it.

 Jason,
 
 I held you today. I rubbed your little foot, and placed upon it a tiny shoe you had kicked off; I smiled, as you giggled the whole time. Afterwards, I meditated in the manner of Lobsang for the last time. Afterwards, I finished the work of generations. You are a latent thing as I write this, an adorable ball of potential. Already a little genius, with a mind full of mischief, a mind worthy, indeed, of Lobsang. 
 
 You are eleven as you read this. You have studied long and hard. You will soon hold in your heart that ambition which has been held in all those of our line, held even - I hope - in your father's heart. And he or his beautiful wife has handed you this letter, as instructed. You will be the first True Reader. You will master Lobsang's final technique, that technique which his graphomanic meditations render impossible to learn. 
 
 If you are reading this, death has taken me before I could tutor you. But such things have happened before and the text has survived all. Fate, itself, longed for its completion and delivered it through me. It will hardly deny you. 
 
 I will never know you as I ought to have. But you will know me with more clarity than any grandson has ever known his grandfather. And though it may violate the dictates of our master, I ask you to dwell on my mind for a little longer than the rest, if only so you can feel (if but for a moment) my love for you, the love which was, even more than our grand task, foremost in my mind when my brush touched that ancient paper for the last time.

I wonder why he never showed me this part of him. I never felt love, I guess. Not from him. Maybe that is what mothers and wives and Susans are for. Maybe men must be like Fei and Grandfather and hold things in their secret selves. And I understand Grandfather more now, I think. He has a secret self, too. He has a part of him that cries on journals, maybe. And the both of us keep our hidden selves from the other.

I will be eleven in three months. He will start teaching me about the scroll, I think. And maybe I won't need your better-than-Harriet mystery-solving powers. He's just going to tell me everything. And you know I said that stuff about how my insides went numb when I lost you? I feel a little less numb now, reading that bit about him holding me when I was very small. 

I will study hard for Grandfather's secret self. And this meditation thing will let me feel his love. And I want to feel it. I want to feel it maybe more than I have ever wanted to feel anything. Even though he yelled at you, I want to feel it. I will help him finish his obligation. I think maybe he will be able to be like he is in the letter after.

And maybe he will let me go outside.  And maybe I will even find the real you and we can play again. That's a really nice thought, isn't it? I better go study a bit before bed.

 

Hey, Susan. I know we talked about how he's going to tell me everything soon. But I am still very curious. And Grandfather just went out to get us food and his pension money. And I went to the cellar again. I could not help myself. 

I am like Harriet in this way, I guess. And I went through all the letters looking for more information on the "graphomanic meditations" and I found a part that explains kinda how it works. And also maybe what I will have to do as the "True Reader." It's a bit creepy. It's a bit like one of my scary books but also kinda cool. I don't know. I will copy and we will talk about it. 

 It is common among the neophyte, first introduced to his calling by his father, to wonder why Lobsang chose to pursue in the serial what seems so amenable to the parallel. In this aspect, The Preambles reward rereading, for Lobsang saw in the minds of men a thorough recording of the passions of their time. But what of the past minds do we truly know? Only what we can infer from poetry and art and aphorism and their more formal texts. 
 
 This Lobsang viewed as a great tragedy, and so sought a communion not only of those parts that both sway and construct a self, but also of various selves through time, each a synecdoche of his generation. Once this is comprehended, the neophyte learns a lesson he will find himself relearning many times: Lobsang is to be trusted in these matters. 
 
 The consolidation of strivings within a single mind is referred to in The Asides as the lesser unification, and the consolidation through time as the greater unification. Before the True Reader can master the former, he must first master the latter. It speaks to the almost hypnotic loyalty induced by The Preambles that there is no record in the asides of any of our line attempting the lesser unification. Lobsang warns against any but the True Reader attempting either, this requiring a mastery of those meditative techniques described in the final section of The Preambles, which techniques the graphomanic meditations immunize a mind against any understanding of.
 
 The thought-streams produced by the graphomanic meditations are hard to describe, and many argue there is little value in us writers reading them, yet I feel I see glimpses of what the True Reader will feel when I do. 
 
 The thought-streams, themselves, resist conventional translation, but Lobsang provides a meditation for this task, of which Wenxuan was the only practitioner, allowing them to be translated without too-great a loss. I do not have the time to learn it, for it takes many years and, the work being completed, there is little point save for your edification.
 
 They are written in that reserved language, a subset first of Tibetan and then Ancient Chinese. And though I can't read Tibetan, I imagine the effect was almost logographic even in that alphabetic script. To read it is to read nonsense that speaks of a higher meaning. To read it is to feel relations just on the edge of one's grasping. It was a hopeless task, but the effect was strong enough that I have spent hours trying to uncover this hidden meaning - which is rare as it produces that mentioned spiritual nausea. Perhaps my bullheadedness in this regard is the only dimension in which I exceed my great ancestors.  

Interesting, hey? I guess it's cool. I get to be better than Grandfather at something. He still knows more poems than me. And his Chinese is still better even though I study so hard. I feel a bit of excitement. I don't know. I feel a bit scared. I will go play something calming on the piano.

 

So I found a half-written letter from my grandfather where he is mad. And it's different. When he's writing to my father, I always feel a bit of respect and love. But this one was going to be mean but he didn't finish it.

 My Son,
 
 I read your last letter with great pain. You must understand the importance of this task! This great chain cannot break now, not so close to the culmination. Please, grant me this. It is all I ask of you. I do not wish to resort to desperate action

Isn't that interesting? Even though it's a bit more like the him I know - it's also a bit nice. He stopped himself from being mean to Father, and didn't finish that letter or send it. He loved him more openly than he does me. It wasn't just his secret self that loved Father. I don't have much more to say today. I just wanted to get this thought down. I am learning more and more about our mystery and about Grandfather.

 

I am eleven now. Grandfather told me about the scroll today. I pretended I didn't know anything, and I didn't feel bad at all, because he keeps things from me sometimes. Maybe I felt a little bad and I am lying. But I didn't show it. I kept it inside and I reacted with awe. And it was real awe, because he showed it to me. And it's huge. It's just gigantic. And he told me some stories from The Asides. 

He mentioned how the scroll owned Fei's horse. And he told that story with real joy. His eyes were full of this happiness that I have never seen before. And he almost laughed. And then it was like he remembered something. Like it reminded him of something or maybe someone. Maybe Father? And then he looked really sad. He looked almost guilty maybe. Whatever it was, it caused him great pain. It was very intense. And he was shaking, his whole body shaking with an on-the-insides pain. And I almost wanted to hug him but I was scared. I have never done that before.

And then he went back to his normal self. He went all cold again and it was like what happened never happened. And he kept teaching me about the scroll but without the joy. 

I asked him if I could maybe read The Asides. And he started shaking again, he started shaking and then he said, "No, Jason. But you can read it after you learn Lobsang's meditations of coalescence. After you read the main text." 

And I worked up the nerve and I hugged him then. And it made it worse. It made it so much worse. He pushed me off him and he ran to his room. And when he came out he was how he always is. And it was like nothing happened at all again.

 

I have studied The Preambles with Grandfather. I say "with" but he just watched me read. I think he was making sure I only read the parts about the meditations of coalescence. And he won't even let me read The Asides, even though all the fun stuff is in them I bet.

Remember in the letter I copied, he mentioned that learning the graphomanic meditations makes the meditations of coalescence impossible to learn? So that is why he's scared, I think, and watches me the whole time I study. And anyway, I mastered the meditation. It wasn't that hard, I guess. It's almost like just reading them changed me a bit, changed me in ways that didn't require me thinking about it. It's hard to describe and it sounds scary but it kind of gives me this feeling of peace that is really nice. And I am not scared. I really like it. 

I am reading the main text now. The things Grandfather called thought-streams - I sort of don't remember them all. I feel very floaty and then my memory goes blank. And then I sort of come to myself and I find I am deeper in the scroll and many, many hours have passed. And Grandfather is kind after. Very kind. And it almost feels like he isn't broken then, like he's a real grandfather. 

 

I forgot to write to you, Susan. It's been so long. I feel like I am shrinking sometimes. I read so much now. It is just reading and sleeping. And I don't remember reading. And at night, I dream I am Lobsang and Fei and the scribe Dorje and so many more. Dorje, whose soul is so beautiful, who loved his wife so much, who lost his child and wanted him back more than anything. Who was the best of all of us. Who was better than Lobsang. Lobsang had a cruelty in him or maybe an indifference. He had no secret self. He had no heart. And I am Grandfather, too, in my dreams. And he wants, he wants to go back to before father died. He wants to undo something he did. But there is a great paradox to him. He wants to undo something that he is very sure he had to do. There is a great tension in him. I can see these things not from information in the text but because I understand his soul when I dream I am him. And understanding his soul I understand what it means that he is now as he is. 

I am my old self more than I have been, and I can't quite grasp what I knew of him hours ago. I can't quite grasp what I remember understanding. It was something he did. Something he can't take back. It is the thing that made him shake when I hugged him, I think. 

I am awake. Now, I am awake and not reading and I am holding you. And I want to see you again. I want to hear you laugh and laugh with you. I want to feel that lightness I felt with you. I want our yard and your teasing and the me-that-was.

I worry I will forget all those things. I worry I will lose you in the dreams of my ancestors. I try to hold you. I try to hold you in my heart. I hold you in my secret self. It is like that box the scroll was in. It is like that box that holds a precious thing. 

I have to go now. I have to sleep. I have to dream. And tomorrow, I will read. I will feel that floaty blankness and I will be less myself than I am now. And I will dream and I will read and I will go blank and I will dream and I will read even more. And the scroll is so long, so long. And I have read it once-through. Lobsang dictates I read it twice. And then I will do a final meditation, one I have not learned yet. And it will be over. 

And I am not sure what will happen. I don't know. I hate it and I love it and I can't stop. Even if Grandfather were not here, I would continue. I can't stop now. I can't stop now. I am like Grandfather. There is a great tension in me. But it is so big. So much bigger than his. And it is unraveling. I am unraveling. We all are unraveling. 

I am sorry I have not written. I don't know if I ever will again. I will try to want to write. I will hold you tight in my secret self. I will not let go. I will give them everything else but I will keep you. I won't let them take you.  

 

I know what happened now. And only some bits of me care.

 

I wish to say goodbye, Susan. A small but insistent wish. And I do this with some regret, with something like nostalgia. The rain will not fall today; it is not in my nature anymore. I still love you, but it is a smaller love.

The story written in you is the story of the True Reader. But I am not him anymore. It is the story of a grandfather and his grandson. I am now both and neither. It is a story of their ancestors. And I am them and not them, also. It is also the story of two great crimes. A father's crime. A grandfather's crime. I am born of his crimes. I am the victim, the perpetrator, the beneficiary, and vastly more besides. 

Jason didn't quite know everything he wanted. He never got to figure all that out. But I know what I want. I know what I want to a degree no one has ever known before. And part of what I want comes from him. And I want to keep you, Susan. As a sort of totem, an aside to the asides. But also because I love you and will always love you. This is what it means to be as coherent as I am. There is a give and take in the meditations of coalescence. It is a sort of negotiation, a sort of trade. And what Jason wanted, what he wanted more than anything, was for me to keep his love for you.

In you, the True Reader did his own version of the graphomanic meditations. So he left two tracings of himself in this world. One lives within me and the other in you. 

Goodbye, Susan. Goodbye, little friend.

I will not write again.
===== END STORY ySoNM6ParKrLRxCAZ =====

===== STORY id=9fJjFqQca95EQY8Cj =====
Title: Continuity
Author: abramdemski
Year: 2025
Karma: 27
WordCount: 809
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/9fJjFqQca95EQY8Cj/continuity
-----
Vessie Zerk lurched into awareness, orienting to who she was, as if waking up from a vivid but rapidly-forgotten dream. She found herself sitting in front of a laptop, cramped in an uncomfortable chair at a small desk. Looking around, she appeared to be in a cheap hotel room, with the curtains drawn.

Vessie looked at the laptop screen. Her brain-implant software, NeuroSync, was open, with a "transfer complete" popup. Did someone do something to her? Had she done something to herself?

The filename was familiar: vez.nrs. Her personal implant files, containing a backup of many aspects of her consciousness. Nothing unusual here. Why had she re-uploaded? Perhaps she had tweaked something? She stood up to look around the cramped hotel room. There was barely room to walk between the bed and the desk.

The cable connected to her head was the kind you might buy in a store, not the kind hand-made in the neuro labs which she proudly used. She reached for the familiar implant port near the base of her skull, and unplugged herself from the laptop. She didn't have to move her hair to the side to get to the clip? It was cut short?

She hurried to look in the scratched mirror over the stained sink. Short hair. Slowly, too slowly, she realized it wasn't her body, either. The face felt utterly familiar, as if she had been seeing it in the mirror her whole life, but intellectually she knew: this was NOT her. She was looking at a heavyset man with a crooked nose. 

Memory thief.

Memory thief! This man, this scum, who she technically was, had copied her memories. She shouldn't be in control, like this. It meant he was an idiot; he didn't know how integrate new memories properly.

Dazed by the realization, she stumbled back to the laptop and deleted the stolen vez.nrs file. She plugged herself back in, ready to delete the copy that had just been uploaded as well. She opened up the option to completely wipe the memory of the implant. Then, she paused, her chubby, unfamiliar-yet-familiar finger hovering over the "enter" key.

...

She couldn't just delete herself, could she?

First of all, if she did, the creep could just try again, right? She was in control, right now. Shouldn't she do something?

... Wouldn't deleting herself be like suicide?

As she sat staring at the screen, she thought about her life. She had worked hard for a career in brain-computer interfaces. She'd studied long hours, she'd lived on the low wages of a graduate student while she worked on her phd, and then worked so hard to get funding, and despite all her business, she'd managed to find a husband and get married ... she was angry that it all could be stolen. Stolen, using the same technology she had worked so hard to create.

She opened up an email to compose a message to herself, but she couldn't find the words. To her other self, she was the memory thief. She'd call the police. She'd lock herself up.

Instead, she got to work integrating the memories properly. She re-downloaded vez.nrs from the brainchip, so that she could use herself as the organizing personality; then, she consolidated the disorganized .nrs files into it.

Time to see what this guy was up to. 

She uploaded the new file, experiencing a brief discontinuity as the chip restarted (much smoother than the hack-job reboot when she'd initially gained consciousness). She saw the architecture around herself, the bland hotel room with its imperfect angles, achieving minimal legal dimensions but wasting them with poor layout. She remembered architecture school. She remembered designing world-famous buildings.

She noticed physics next. It was there in the dim flourescent lights. The emissive coating of the electrodes was nearly stripped off. The ionized mercury vapor struggled to maintain a plasma.

He wasn't selling memories like she expected. He was hoarding them. Collecting geniuses. He'd been an ordinary crackpot until he stole the skills of the best mathematicians in the world. Then, he kept going.

Each time, he became the person he stole. She remembered each of the previous victims waking up, like she had a few minutes ago. Each time, they'd somehow decided to steal again. Why would they do that? She even recalled them willingly swapping between each other to access their various skills, too ignorant of the technology to integrate their memories together.

What motivated them to work together? Why steal more memories?

She thought back...

Oh. Oh.

She spent a moment trying to reason her way out of it. There should be a better way, except... she could already remember trying to find one many times. 

She had little time to waste. Things would be smoother now, with her expertise. She went back to the laptop, starting to plan the next target.
===== END STORY 9fJjFqQca95EQY8Cj =====

===== STORY id=nXJ8f5HdEe9en4rt4 =====
Title: The Responder
Author: Screwtape
Year: 2025
Karma: 33
WordCount: 2104
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/nXJ8f5HdEe9en4rt4/the-responder
-----
On the fifth of the month, Kaven looked at the phone in his hands. On the screen was a big blue button, which he had been working himself up to pressing for fifteen minutes now. It was hard to admit that he needed help.

Kaven pressed the button and waited.

It didn’t take long for him to be connected, hardly more than three or four seconds. The operator’s voice was calm and smooth as she picked up. “Hello, engagement services. What’s your location?”

“M and 84th, on the red bench. I'm in a yellow coat.”

There was the sound of rapid keystrokes.

“Are you allergic to dogs?”

“No.”

“We’ll have someone there in four minutes.”

Kaven leaned back against the bench and looked at the sky. His mouth was dry and his eyes ached. He’d been at work for twelve hours and though he’d eaten something, he couldn’t remember what. Four minutes later he was interrupted by a woman in a navy blue shirt, a bandana tied around the lower half of her face, and five large dogs all leashed and looking excitable.

“You the bored guy?” 

Kaven nodded, and got handed a pair of leashes for his trouble. 

“I’m Sivad. Those there are Bolo and Hada. We all could use a little exercise. Up for a bit of a jog?”

Kaven nodded again, and got to his feet. 

“Great,” Sivad said, “We need to go another four blocks north and pick up another bored guy, then we can get a good run in. Let me know if you’ll want to slow down!"

 

On the ninth of the month, Kaven looked at the phone is his hands. On the screen was a big blue button, which he had been working himself up to pressing for ten minutes now. He didn't want to need help too much, to be an unnecessary burden. He just couldn't think of anything that sounded fun to do.

Kaven pressed the button and waited.

"Hello, engagement services. What's your location?"

"N and 84th, south corner of the field. I'm in a yellow coat."

"Are you familiar with the works of William the Bard?"

"No? Is that a news service?"

"We'll have someone there in six minutes."

Kaven looked at the phone in his hand. He was tempted to look up William, but instead waited like he was supposed to. Seven minutes later three teenagers came skidding around the corner on rollerblades, laughing at each other as they urged each other to run faster before coming to an abrupt stop right in front of him. They were wearing matching styles of jackets and masked helmets, in three different shades of green. One, the darkest green of pine, managed to force down their laughter long enough to talk.

"You're the one who called engagement services, right?" When Kaven nodded they kept going. "Awesome! Just give us a second, hang on, this is gonna be great."

"It's our first time volunteering-" said the one in the brightest green, a lime so electric it was eyewatering to look at. His young voice cracked on "volunteer."

"-no you don't have to tell them that-"

"-it's fine, it's fine, look we do it from the top, you start-"

Kaven winced. You could turn down whatever the responder from engagement services had in mind, though it was considered rude to hit the blue button again that day. This didn't look like it was going to be good and he considered asking the trio to go away and leave him be, but then, what he'd been doing before they got here was scroll a feed on his phone full of people he didn't know talking about policies he didn't care about in cities he couldn't have pointed to on a map.

The middle one cleared her throat, and the other two chuckled to themselves the straightened up.  "A piece from the works of Bill the Bard."

Pine then launched into a quite a different tone, rehearsed lines from what was apparently a play. "Is all our company here?"

Lime green chimed in "You were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip."

And so they went, until the trio went past the part they'd plainly rehearsed and into the rest of the play where they plainly hadn't but had apparently watched enough to stagger through, introducing a stranger to what was evidently their favourite story. It wasn't going to be his favourite, but they did get one laugh out of him at their antics, and it was new. Afterwards they invited him to go to a better performance of a different William play that was being held in a park across town, and lacking anything better to do Kaven went.

 

On the eighteenth of the month, Kaven looked again for any theatre productions in town, and finding none pressed the big blue button. He gave his location. This time, unexpectedly, there was no followup question. When the responder arrived, she was dressed in a red so dark it reminded him of astrology pictures of a black hole. Her mask was a wisp of filigree and burgundy, and she glided to a dignified stop at a park table a dozen feet away. 

"You called, saying you were bored."

Her voice was like honey or molasses. Kaven nodded, and the woman withdrew the pieces for some kind of game from her bag and began to lay them out on the table. 

"Tonight we will play a game. This game has stakes." It was just after noon, but she sold the theatricality and somber tone. 

Tone or no, Kaven was confused for a moment. "Engagement services is free. The responders are volunteers, right? I think there's a bit of public funds running the switchboard, but calling is definitely free."

She inclined her head. "The stake is your name. I will explain the rules, and if I win, you have to give me your name. If you win, I will tell you mine."

They played three games for practice, and then one for stakes. Kaven played, and lost, and told her his name. Then the woman set the board up again as it had been halfway through, and pointed out Kaven's key mistake, and they played again from there until he lost again. The game was deep and interesting, though he wouldn't have found it so enchanting if her interest hadn't crackled like a flame beneath her poise. 

When she stood to leave, evening had fallen. Kaven asked her what the name of the game was, and she gave the smallest bow. "It has no name yet."

When he got home he wrote down all the rules he remembered and made his own copy out of cut up shipping boxes.

 

He was sure he'd forgotten a rule, but he couldn't remember what. He tried to reinvent what it must be, making patches to prevent the cheap victories he scored playing himself or a couple of friends he hadn't spent much time with lately. They were happy to see him again; work had been leaving him listless for a while.

By the thirtieth of the month though, there came an evening where he was tired of playing himself and his friends were tired of playing. He hit the big blue button and someone arrived who wanted to teach him to stitch and knit. A week later he pressed it and a biologist cheerfully recruited him and half a dozen other bored people to scour one of the larger parks, counting a specific kind of bug while being treated to a lecture on the local ecology. The day after that someone sat down with him to co-write stories, and though he didn't feel good at it they were the kind of person who liked coaxing ideas out of new writers. Everyone who volunteered for engagement services was that sort of person, at least for the activity they offered people.

Then he got the woman in red again. He immediately asked for her to explain the rules again, and took notes this time. She set out the board as she gave them.

"Tonight we will play a game. This game has stakes."

"But you already have my name?"

She nodded her head. "The stake is your number. If I win, you have to give me your contact information. If you win, I will tell you my name."

They played two games for practice, with Kaven trying to map out the implications of the missing rules on the strategies he'd formed. She offered a third practice game, but he declined, feeling uncharacteristically confident. Then she beat him with a series of rapid but elegant decoys so impressive he had her play it out exactly that way again, this time taking notes on how she'd taken him apart without his even realizing.

He gave her his number with the first genuine, beaming smile he'd had in months. They played one more game, and this time she made it last slow and sweet before beating him. 

Before she left, she let him take a picture of the board and the pieces. He hoped she would call, but she didn't.

 

Work took twelve hours a day. Sleep took another six or seven. Kaven went to board game luncheons now, though he didn't show anyone other than his friends the game. She hadn't named it, presumably didn't want it to spread until it was ready. He thought there were some tweaks to the rules that would make the lategame more interesting, but kept playing games against himself to be sure. Once in a while he saw the green trio at theatre shows in the park and waved, or met up with Sivad if she needed extra hands to walk the dogs. He still hit the big blue button whenever the idea of something random sounded more appealing than anything else, or when he couldn't decide what he wanted to do.

He helped an old woman clean up the park, finding the very infrequent stray pieces of litter and learning how to prune a rosebush. He was handed a paintbrush and asked to help repaint a building's mural. He got the knitter again, and then a third time and proved good enough to get a hat that was comfortable to wear. He was read poems and short stories and comedy skits and treated to lecture after lecture on the insect ecology of the park at P and 64th. He got to know a few other regulars users of engagement services, his fellows among the listless and the bored. He took less time to hit the blue button now, turning to it whenever he caught himself scrolling his phone's feed for more than a minute or two. 

And then one day the woman with the board game showed up again.

Kaven set out his copy on the table for her inspection. He'd made this one of carved wood and a cloth kerchief that had started blank and he'd stitched the lines of the board into, and he kept it in his bag in order to play himself at breakfast. She nodded approval, granting him the first smile he'd seen from her. 

"Before we play, I want to run some ideas I had past you." 

What followed was a discussion of the endgame scenarios. Instead of practice games they set up midgame positions and worked through those, seeing the implications of various changes to the rules. Two of his ideas weren't as good as he'd thought, but one lead to fun counterplay for a range of situations that would have been checkmates without his new rule. When they cleared the board after that time to reset, she gave her familiar intonation.

"Tonight we will play a game. This game has stakes."

Kaven nodded eagerly. He'd actually won the last game, and he'd been wondering for months what her name was.

"The stake is your time. If I win, you have to teach other people the game, though it has no name yet and perhaps never will. You do not have to do this through engagement services, though it is one option and the one I use. If you win, I will tell you my name."

The board was set up. It was waiting for Kevan to make the first move. His hand hovered over a piece, then he put his hand back down to pick up his phone.

"Before we play, can you help me with the application? Win or lose, I want to be a responder."
===== END STORY nXJ8f5HdEe9en4rt4 =====

===== STORY id=Gvoh9ztGbiwEDhngs =====
Title: A Harried Meeting
Author: Ben Pace
Year: 2025
Karma: 55
WordCount: 1797
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Gvoh9ztGbiwEDhngs/a-harried-meeting
-----
An old pub that nobody much visits. An owner who is always in a drugged-out stupor. Background music that never changes. A pub that has remained throughout war and revolution, and a single brick-wall that has not changed all that time. You are supposed to be investigating a murder. A gunshot in a distant land, far away from Revachol.

YOU – Run your fingers through your greasy hair, finish your eighth beer.

SHIVERS \[Challenging: Success\] – People pass in through here occasionally, and tap a pattern out on the wall. Then they aren't in the pub.

1. What is the pattern?
2. Where are they?
3. What's the owner taking? Could I get some?

SHIVERS – Not in this city any longer.

1. What is the pattern?
2. Where are they?
3. What's the owner taking? Could I get some?

SHIVERS – A man in a tall hat and a long coat taps the top brick, the bottom brick, then beside it to the left then the right 10 times.

INLAND EMPIRE – An ominous, foreboding feeling fills you, as you look at the wall.

1. I want to know what happens to them. (Walk over to the wall.)
2. I don't know that I want to continue this life that I currently have. (Walk over to the wall.)
3. I like drinking this drink. (Ignore the thought.)

VISUAL CALCULUS — The wall has a timeless quality to it. No dust has accumulated. No pictures hang. In contrast to everything else in this dirty and dingy bar, it looks like not a day has passed since it was installed.

1. Tap the wall. (Travel.)

A whooshing sound is heard. A room of people dressed as if for some convention. the quality of the clothing does not look very good, probably these people spend as much time in bars as you do. A boy stands in front of you, with a wooden stick in hand, as though he might make to attack you with it. Above him, inside the pub, a sign reads "The Hog’s Head Inn".

1. "What's your name?"
2. "What is a child doing in this pub?"
3. "Is that stick for stirring alcohol? Do you have alcohol?"
4. "Why are you dressed up like you're entering a wizard fancy-dress contest?"
5. "I get the sense that you're even more unbelievably arrogant than I am. Are you aware that I'm a secret rockstar?"

YOU — "What's your name?"

BOY — "Harry. I'm here on official business. What's your name?"

1. "Harry."
2. "DuBois. Lieutenant Detective Harry DuBois."
3. "You're not Harry, I'm Harry."
4. "You look like your parents might be rich, do you think you can give me some money?"
5. "Your outfit suggests you too could benefit from a communist revolution. Join me, comrade?"

YOU — "DuBois. Lieutenant Detective Harry DuBois."

HARRY — "Ah, I see the Ministry is continuing to track my movements, even after all I explicitly instructed them not to. You know at some point your boss is going to lose his job over this."

LOGIC \[Easy: Success\] — This isn't the kind of way a young teenager normally talks. With their peculiar clothing, perhaps everyone here is engaged in a LARP of some kind?

AUTHORITY — It seems this little upstart doesn't respect you, even after you told him your position. We should teach him some respect.

1. "Where am I?"
2. "Why do you think I am part of the 'ministry'?"
3. "What movements of yours might I need to be tracking?"
4. "Are you and everyone here mucking about like a bunch of children?"
5. "Would you like to learn the meaning of 'lieutenant detective'? (Take out gun.)

YOU — "What movements of yours might I need to be tracking?"

HARRY —  "I'm sure you have your answer already detective, and anything I say won't affect your conclusions. That's one of the disadvantages of having the bottom line of your reasoning already written, before you make new observations or learn new evidence. You aren't really much of a conversation partner any longer."

1. "Where am I?"
2. "Why do you think I am part of the 'ministry'?"
3. "What movements of yours might I need to be tracking?"
4. "Are you and everyone here mucking about like a bunch of children?"
5. "Would you like to learn the meaning of 'lieutenant detective'? (Take out gun.)

YOU — "Where am I?"

HARRY — "Why, you're in The Hog's Head Inn of course. I wonder what magic you used to track me here that didn't let you know where you were apparating to."

1. "Where am I?"
2. "Why do you think I am part of the 'ministry'?"
3. "What movements of yours might I need to be tracking?"
4. "Are you and everyone here mucking about like a bunch of children?"
5. "Would you like to learn the meaning of 'lieutenant detective'? (Take out gun.)

YOU — "Would you like to learn the meaning of 'lieutenant detective'? (Take out gun.)

HARRY — "Color me surprised! I didn't know that the Ministry knew what guns were. I guess you guys are a little better clued in to how the world works than the rest of the population of this little magical enclave. Nonetheless, it wouldn't be much use for defense here, I have an anti-combustion charm in effect to prevent fire attacks that would negate the effect of the gunpowder in the chamber of that weapon."

AUTHORITY – Perhaps we could throw the gun at him?

HALF-LIGHT – If the gun doesn't work, I'm ready to do what it takes to take him out. Hell, I'd remove my own bones to club him over the head.

1. "Where am I?"
2. "Why do you think I am part of the 'ministry'?"
3. "What movements of yours might I need to be tracking?"
4. "Are you and everyone here mucking about like a bunch of children?"
5. "Would you like to learn the meaning of 'lieutenant detective'? (Take out gun.)

YOU — "Why do you think I am part of the 'ministry'?"

HARRY — "You apparate into a pub just beside me. You tell me you're a detective. My best friend has just been killed. What other explanation is there than that you suspect I had a hand in their demise, however improbable it is?"

YOU — "I could just be another drunk like the rest of the people here."

HARRY — "...I guess that's possible. And this is a somewhat seedy bar, the base rate of detectives in here wouldn't be that low."

HARRY — "What kind of investigator are you, anyway?"

YOU — "A homicide detective."

HARRY — "Ah. You think I killed Hermione."

YOU — "...did you?"

HARRY — "I don't know that denying it would provide any Bayesian evidence, so I won't."

YOU — "...I should probably take you in for questioning."

HARRY — "Ugh, I am so disappointed in the quality of thinking in the modern day detectives. Do you even have a sense of the base rates for murdering your best friend? Have you done any Fermis on the question?"

YOU — "No? What's a 'fermi'?"

HARRY — "Ugh. Named after Enrico Fermi, leading physicist and architect of the nuclear age, he was famous for doing rapid calculations in his head. During the 1945 Trinity Test of a nuclear explosion, as the shockwave hit, he dropped a small piece of paper to float to the floor, and saw how far it was pushed back. He used this to estimate the strength of this explosion within a factor of two. Do you understand how impressive that is? But of course, from the perspective of reality, it's not impressive at all, we're constantly surrounded by massive amounts of evidence and we barely take any effort to deduce the logical implications of what we see. You should constantly be asking yourself to calculate base rates to the nearest order of magnitude. Come now, do an estimate. Take the number of people who have committed a murder, and compare it to the number of accused?"

1. No, I won't play your foolish game.
2. \[LOGIC - Challenging 12\] Sure, I'll give it a go.

YOU — Sure, I'll give it a go.

LOGIC \[Challening: Failure\] — Well, personally I've shot 3 people in my time at the RCM, and that's unusually low for people here, the average is more like ten to twenty. So let's say the average person has shot at ten people, and killed half, then that's a decent number of kills. As for accusations, I rarely actually arrest anyone unless I have overhwelming proof, so I think very few people actually arrested have committed crimes. So I think that our suspects in custody are often actual criminals.

YOU — "I'd say most people have killed someone, and my instincts about who are suspects are approximately never wrong."

HARRY — "I, what... how can most people have killed someone? That would mean that as many people are as alive have also been killed? Do you believe the population halved in the last 50 years via murder alone?"

YOU — "Well... we have lived through a war."

HARRY — "I... well, this at least seems to be stretching the definition of murder, which is an unlawful killing. But still I think Voldemort's people hadn't been involved in that magnitude of killings. I think our disconnect may be deeper than arithmetic."

ENCYCLOPEDIA \[Easy: Success\] — We really have no idea who Voldemort is.

CONEPTUALIZATION — It sounds like a good name for the leader of a heavy metal band. Maybe we should call ourselves Voldemort?

HARRY — "Anyway, if you don't mind, I am clearly grieving my friend's death, and don't need much interruption via the law if you don't have specific questions."

EMPATHY — He is just saying this to get out of the interaction, but he is also deeply sad beneath his austere outward persona.

INLAND EMPIRE — He has known pain like we have, which is especially sad for a child so young. Yet he still has life behind his eyes. Perhaps we have something to learn from him.

YOU — "Well I'm sorry about your friend kid. I'd be interested in hearing about it. But I still don't know quite where I am, and I'm looking for another drink, I have my own sorrows to drown."

HARRY — "You don't look like you know what you're doing here. I'm going to order you the alcoholic beverage that's charmed to reduce the alcohol in your system. The person I'm here to meet is late, and some part of me feels inclined to hear you out, so I'll drink some butterbeer myself."

To be continued.
===== END STORY Gvoh9ztGbiwEDhngs =====

===== STORY id=rgzAxiudL6Yp9cvYy =====
Title: Soul-Whore
Author: Eneasz
Year: 2025
Karma: 44
WordCount: 1637
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/rgzAxiudL6Yp9cvYy/soul-whore
-----
Zyn met her in a dance club, as she sashayed under slowly pulsing lasers. He matched her pace, drop-swaying with each sidelong flick of her jet black hair. He closed his eyes and let her rhythm guide his steps, finding he liked the gentler flavor it gave the music. It brought the deeper thrums closer to his attention, gave them a resonance in his chest that tilted his head back into the strobe lights. When he opened his eyes later he saw her watching him with sad, half-lidded eyes.

Her name was Lyra. They spoke in the back area, he bought her a drink, and they danced together. She draped the music over herself as she danced. They lost themselves for hours and as he floated on lasers and bass he knew this night would pay for itself. Nothing that would go viral, but a perfect low-key night that always got a smattering of downloads.

When they went back to her place she held onto him tightly when he took her to bed, like she was afraid to hope but couldn’t help herself. He took his time, starting gentle and progressing to firmer and faster as she wrapped around him and rose to meet him with little gasps. By the time they were done the sadness in her eyes had been driven out, replaced by a surprised wonderment.

“What was that?” she asked, almost confused. He smiled at her.

“Let me stay the night?” he asked in return.

 

She lived in a woodshop with two other artists, mattresses on the floor at one end in rough cubicles they’d constructed themselves. They created art, large installations made of wood and wire and various stains, making enough to live off of in their guerilla apartment. In the morning as he cooked her breakfast on their propane stove, he pitched the idea.

“The memories come with prosopagnosia by default,” he explained, “that’s the fancy term for face-blindness. No one can recognize you. But they sell much better if that’s turned off. People like to see faces. All you gotta do is say it’s alright with you.”

“And you’re only selling the memories of us in the dance club?”

“Yeah. I’ll cut you in for ten percent.”

“So you’re really a soul-wh…” she caught herself, “an experience-worker?”

“We create beautiful moments. We carve them from reality and bring them to everyone. Used to be only the rich and healthy got to enjoy most transcendent experiences. Now everyone can.” He slid the eggs onto a plate. “Qualia recording is the best thing ever,” he said, without a doubt. He caught her gaze as he brought her the eggs and smiled at her. “And I want to take you to Portugal.”

“Why?”

“Because you’re amazing.”

She was amazing. She glowed in his eyes. Three years his elder and determined to carve god from the wood they dragged in from cast-offs and beaches. And succeeding. Living off her art! She’d never compromised, never spent a decade selling away her life an hour at a time in a beige cubicle in a beige office. Create art or die, and she hadn’t died yet.

They spent the entire day in her woodshop, comparing their earlier lives and recent adventures. She’d just returned from a two month gig creating a huge custom piece for some millionaire’s daughter’s birthday party. It paid more than half her yearly expenses, and was seen by a few hundred people. He fell a bit deeper in love with every passing hour. Zyn stayed a second night despite himself, and left the next morning to return home, two hours away by train. He upload the qualia recording and arranged his life.

Four days later they boarded a train to Portugal.

 

They stayed at a yoga retreat deep in the mountains, which Zyn’s friend worked at during the tourism months. Zyn got a room at a massive discount as it was not yoga season. It only 80% bankrupted him.

 

The first day they explored the grounds, met the local dogs, and fucked like bunnies.

The second day they found an old fort, and explored its vegetation-choked rooms and crumbling tower. In a room with half its roof missing he laid her down in the sun and went down on her. After the sun had shifted he pulled himself up into her, her eyes growing wide as he entered her without protection for the first time. They consummated on wood boards older than his home country.

He stroked her hair as they lay together after, watching birds flit overhead.

The third day they took acid and wandered into the forest. They found a hidden waterfall nestled in a shadow-wrapped crevice. The mist chilled them, and they worked their way back to the land of sunshine hand-in-trembling-hand. They returned to his room and made hot chocolate and watched the moon rise.

“Lyra, this is the best week of my life. We can’t hide beauty like this. You don’t lock it behind bars or in a single mind. Let me share us with the world.”

“What would you share?”

“All of it. Every time I touch you, every time you look at me. Every minute here. These moments will burn bright for all time.”

“If it’s important to you…” she took his hand, “then it’s important to me.”

“Yes?”

“Yes.”

The fourth day they shared their favorite music, and she sat him down to watch several episodes of her favorite animated show from her childhood. He found vague memories of it in his own past, wondering at the random sparks of memories it struck. They surrounded the bed with candles she’d found in a basement, and as they made love that night her gaze never pulled from his. She drank him in with sparkling eyes, her lids fluttering between half-closed and spread wide, breathing his name.

The fifth day they compared secret fears and dreams, cleaned up after themselves, and took the long train ride back home. He showered at the woodshop and stayed one last night in her bed.

 

Their recording did well. In monetary terms it did as well as the sculpture Lyra had created for her millionaire. But it had been so much more beautiful than any sculpture. It could be felt by so many. Zyn had never adored someone as deeply as her, never felt such searing passion. It was a love they wrote poems about. It was a poem anyone could live in, due to his recording. He’d never made a connection that strong with anyone, it was the most emotionally intense week of his life.

Lyra pounded on his door, screaming his name from the hall. He groaned and pulled on pants. She hadn’t been able to move on. Pounding continued without abating as he stumbled across his dingy apartment at four o’clock. He yanked the door open and peered up into the face of unrepentant addict.

“Lyra, Jesus, you’ve got to move on,” he said. Her hand whipped out to slap him across the face.

“You don’t even reply to my texts anymore!” she yelled, “you said we would text, and dance, you said it wasn’t over!”

The problem was that whatever he gave her, it was never enough. Her texts grew increasingly unhinged as she didn’t get to take over his life.

“It wouldn’t be over if you had any sense of moderation. I am not your property.”

He had told her that every sunset ends, every rainbow fades. Life is a cycle. He would love her forever, and they could still dance together when they were at the same club, still see each other at the same parties. He would have even been happy to go on holiday with her again every year or two, “reunion experiences” often sold well. But to keep hitting those same notes with the same person, over and over… it was chasing the dragon. It was desperately clinging to a high that wouldn’t return. It was downright pathetic.

Crucially, it was artistically offensive. Zyn wasn’t here to ease into lukewarm comfort-slop. His art was to live the most intense experiences, and share them with the world. To plunge headfirst into searing raw emotion and burn with it for all to feel. Any less was cheating his audience. Any less was cheapening his own life.

“You fucking whore!” Lyra spat. “You tore out my heart and fed it to incels and pedophiles!”

“You should go,” he told her, as he pulled back. “If you’re still here in five minutes I’m calling the police.”

Zyn closed the door, nerves on edge as Lyra screeched in rage in the hall. He’d been warned of this. Some people simply wouldn’t accept a withdrawal of consent once they’d tasted something they wanted. It wasn’t enough that they’d experienced this wonder for a while. It didn’t matter that the alternative was to have never experienced such a thing at all. They had created a flowering of some of the greatest emotions humans could share, made a perfect moment and caught it in perfect crystal stasis to shine for all, forever. And instead of basking in the wonder of being one of the few who could have this in her life, she turned it into this.

The greatest tragedy of all, he thought as the door shook under her blows, was that she wasn’t wired for qualia-recording. A rage this hot and pure would blaze across the internet for months. She could be a legend in her own right, bringing a depth of intensity that would tear the breath out of casuals and critics alike. She could be a peer in the industry, a rocketing star.

Instead she wasted it all against a wood door that felt nothing at all.
===== END STORY rgzAxiudL6Yp9cvYy =====

===== STORY id=P6BCRfusJefJw6Bei =====
Title: Interview: What it's like to be a bat
Author: Saul Munn
Year: 2025
Karma: 77
WordCount: 1283
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/P6BCRfusJefJw6Bei/interview-what-it-s-like-to-be-a-bat
-----
For the purposes of this transcript, some high-pitched clicking sounds have been removed. The below is an otherwise unedited transcript of an interview between Dwarkesh Patel[^zj8flfj68zs] and a bat.

DWARKESH: Thanks for coming onto the podcast. It’s great to have you—

BAT: Thanks for having me. Yeah.

DWARKESH: You can hear me okay? I mean, uh, all the equip—

BAT: Yep, I can hear you.

DWARKESH: Great, great. So—

BAT: I can hear your voice, too.

BAT: If that’s what you were asking.

DWARKESH: What? No, I was—

BAT: Oh, “hear” probably isn’t the right word, I guess. “Sense”? No, it’s not “see.” The translation suggestion thing isn’t right.

BAT: I can \[inaudible\] you. It’s still so weird to me how humans echolocate through your eyes.

DWARKESH: Er, sorry, I was asking—

BAT: Yeah, I can also hear your voice.

DWARKESH: Uh, great. Okay.

DWARKESH: So, the question we’ve all been waiting for, haha: what is it like to be a bat?

BAT: Oh, sure. Yeah, that’s been everyone’s first question. I dunno, what’s it like to be a human? Haha.

BAT: No, but — I mean, it’s not like I’ve ever felt your internal experience. How should I know which details of my phenomenology are relevant to you, and which aren’t?

DWARKESH: Oh, interesting. I guess that’s fair. Do you feel like you have a good grasp of what it would be like for you to be another bat? Or is it, like, just a mystery whether—

BAT: I have as much a grasp on what my fellow bats’ consciousnesses feel like as you have on your species-mates’ consciousnesses. Actually, no. I have much worse of a grasp of what it would be like for me to be a different bat than you do of what it would be like to be a different human from you.

DWARKESH: Oh, really? Why, uh — why would that be the case?

BAT: We can’t — couldn’t — communicate with each other with nearly the precision nor fidelity that humans can. We haven’t built epistemic institutions that are curious about philosophy of mind, nor societal traditions that cause our young ones to rigorously reason on their natural empathy, nor neurological technology that let us peer into others’ minds, nor psychiatric practices that carefully catalogue and study every ontology of mind-state. We don’t — didn’t — have the intellectual capabilities of mapping each others’ phenomenology, let alone the physical and social technologies necessary to create such maps with detail.

DWARKESH: But it doesn’t seem like we’ve made much progress, right? We being humans, sorry.

\[pause\]

DWARKESH: Like, we don’t have a great grasp of what stuff consciousness is made of, or what the fuck is going on with psychedelics. There’s so much in our phenomenology that’s just completely bizarre. Synesthesia, aphantasia — I mean, I have no idea what it’d be like to not have visual imagery. Like—

BAT: Oh, sure, but you were saying that humans haven’t made much progress. I don’t think that’s true at all.

DWARKESH: Yeah, explain what—

BAT: You know what synesthesia is. Humans in the 1700s didn’t. Again with aphantasia. I mean, until the 1950s people didn’t know what LSD was. You have made strides — serious, important strides — in neuroscience, in psychology, in cognitive science, in philosophy of mind. Even just in the last 50 years. I could go on. You get my point.

DWARKESH: Okay, I see what you’re saying. Yeah, I agree we’ve definitely made progress, but it still doesn’t feel like we’re actually getting anywhere closer to knowing what it’s like to have consciousness. I mean, obviously I know what it’s like to have consciousness, right, like I’m not a p-zombie, but I don’t know what Trump’s internal experience is, or—

BAT: Or what it’s like to be a bat?

\[laughter\]

DWARKESH: Yeah, exactly. Or what it’s like to be a bat. Or a bird, or a floor tile, or a Balrog. Or the United States, or an organization. Like, we’re nowhere closer to knowing what the internal experiences of minds very different from our own— actually, we’re not even close to knowing what it’s like to be something really similar to us. Not from the inside.

BAT: Sure, that’s fair. I guess, y’know, each of you humans knows what it’s like to be at least one particular young human, and each of us bats knows what it’s like to be at least one particular young bat.

DWARKESH: Oh, that’s interesting. Yeah. You’re talking—

BAT: I’m talking about the version of yourself as a child. Obviously, you are in relevant senses both the same and not the same person as you were when you were younger. And you know what it’s like to be a five-year-old— well, maybe you don’t remember actually being five, but you probably remember what it’s generally like to be a fifteen-year-old Dwarkesh, and what it’s generally like to be a twenty-year-old Dwarkesh.

BAT: And my guess is that we can get some clues about the texture of others’ consciousnesses from introspecting about — or trading with, or otherwise accounting for the preferences of — past versions of ourselves.

\[pause\]

BAT: But on the other hand, though, you only know what it’s like to be the sorts of consciousnesses that will lead later to the current version of Dwarkesh. Like, you definitely don’t remember what a fifty-year-old Dwarkesh feels like from the inside, because the version of Dwarkesh who’s sitting in front of me has never been a fifty-year-old Dwarkesh. But another example is just, y’know, a bat or something. My consciousness will never be able to grow into what the insides of your skull.

DWARKESH: Not yet, at least. Maybe Neurablink will—

BAT: That’s true, not yet. Hence the progress I was talking about before.

BAT: But to continue — right, so there’s also the obvious point that even the phenomenology of the most foreign, alien past version of yourself that you remember is likely still much, much closer to your current phenomenology than any other possible consciousness’. Like, current-Dwarkesh is way closer to fifteen-year-old Dwarkesh than to Trump, or— let alone to me. Let alone to the more bizarre forms of consciousness you brought up earlier.

DWARKESH: Yeah, that’s fair.

BAT: But I do think it’s important to point out that…

 

🔒 Discussion continues for another few hours — upgrade your subscription to Dwarkesh Premium for the full transcript.

 

BAT: Shall we wrap things up there?

DWARKESH: That sounds good, I’m getting pretty tired. Thanks so—

BAT: Oh goodness! I forgot about the time difference, sorry.

DWARKESH: No worries, yeah — it’s 2am human standard time, yeah.

BAT: Oh! It’s nearly lunchtime for me, I was just getting hungry.

DWARKESH: Haha, enjoy your bugs.

BAT: Thanks. Enjoy your sleep.

DWARKESH: Thanks for coming on the podcast.

\[closing music\]

DWARKESH: A few housekeeping items:

DWARKESH: First, I have some, uh, pretty fantastical interviews lined up, that I’m really excited to do. Stay tuned for those.

DWARKESH: Second, big thanks to today’s sponsor: Neurablink is the fastest, safest, and highest-fidelity brain-computer interface ever created. We actually used some of Neurablink’s tech in today’s episode, it was a great time meeting some of the team. They’re hiring across the board — you can check out some of their open positions at Neurablink dot com slash Dwarkesh. That’s Neurablink dot com, slash Dwarkesh.

DWARKESH: And last, but of course not least, thank you for listening. As always, the best way you can support the podcast is by sharing with your friends, on Twitter, in groupchats — it just really means the world to me.

[^zj8flfj68zs]: Dwarkesh Patel does not necessarily endorse this post.
===== END STORY P6BCRfusJefJw6Bei =====

===== STORY id=zFMgPvMsESGHRapax =====
Title: Well, Seasons Greatings Everyone! [Short Fiction]
Author: Shiva's Right Foot
Year: 2025
Karma: 15
WordCount: 868
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/zFMgPvMsESGHRapax/well-seasons-greatings-everyone-short-fiction
-----
"Well, Season's Greatings everyone!" It was the third time the middle age woman who lived on Buffington had repeated herself in the transport's exit. Each of us regulars were exchanging short glances waiting for the stranger to give the response, but he seemed to know something was up.

"Don't you mean Season's Greetings?" the tall man who lives on Ravenna finally responds. If the stranger wasn't here it would have been the pretty young woman's turn, but nobody blames her for taking a chance. We all would have done it in her situation. But none of us really can afford a long wait, and it looks like the tall man was in the biggest rush.

"No, I mean Greatings because everyone should know how great this season really is!" While the human ear could detect the lack of genuine emotion in her voice, we all had become practiced in singing the right intonation with minimal effort to make the AI register us as having an acceptable level of "enthusiasm." Can it even be called that anymore? Does anyone even remember what genuine emotion felt like?

One of the quirks of the AI that has developed over the years is that you have to say an appropriate greeting on exiting the transport, and in winter months this means this particular set of "Season's Greatings, no Greetings, no actually Greatings," exchanges. There are several similar quirks which have developed where at some point it becomes known that a given small action enters the algorithm in a positive way, and when that knowledge spreads everyone starts doing that thing, so if you don't do it you look like a one-in-a-million negative outlier and you are on the fast-track for suspended account privileges or potentially dis-personalization. Normally the "Greetings" responder is not penalized, but the regulars have noticed that responding at the Buffington stop will earn you a 50 credit penalty applied when the general system updates overnight.

Is it local to us? -You can't talk about such a negative topic with strangers or even most acquaintances, that's a credit ding. Is it just a bug in the system? -Who knows? If you try and make a report you get what looks like an automated response. Most of the time issues like this disappear on their own, seemingly with or without attempting to file a report or complaint form. But us regulars on this route have known about this quirk for almost two years now, and we have been pretty good about taking turns with the credit hit. Once someone says the opener, the transport won't move until it completes, and the woman on Buffington can't afford to risk not saying it. When a stranger is on the route, as happens occasionally, we'll hesitate and hope they say the response lines, but this one seems like he was a little more alert and questioned our hesitation.

He stayed on through the ride. I usually get off last and have a short stretch by myself before my stop, but this stranger was apparently going farther. When I needed to "make small talk" I went with Dodgers commentary 34, which in its current form goes something like "What do you think about The Dodger's next season? Doesn't Jackson have shorting stop stop ball average?" There hasn't been Baseball in decades at least, the records are hazy; a lot of things have changed since patch 7.839, or "The Upgrade" as some people (may have) called it. The Stranger's response shocked me: "Yeah, that's a fortunate pick on your part. That small-talk pattern was apparently deprecated but it seems like no new behavior was slotted in, so I can just say whatever here and it ends up being scored as a proper response. Just listen. I don't know what kind of problem you have going on with that stop back there, but I know what can solve it: Kismet. That's K-I-S-M-E-T. Type that in to your browser, it will ask for your biometric sig, give it and then make a request. I may know a few tricks, but I don't know how this one works, or even if it always works. What I do know about it is that what ever it is watches how you use it. I can't tell you how I know, just trust me when I say not to abuse it or ask too much. You'll probably be good un-biting whatever bullet the tall guy bit for us back there though."

"Thanks I..." When the sound left my lips his eyes and nostrils flared in frustration. I realized what I had done: by speaking again the AI registered his response as complete and we were locked back into structured public speech patterns. I quickly resume my half of Dodgers Commentary 34 and hope I'm not charged too much for my brief deviation. He seemed to glare at me slightly during his responses and I could tell he was struggling not to have a harsh tone. We didn't have further chance to talk before he got out. When he left we made eye contact again and from outside in one of the vehicle's visual spectrum blind-spots he mouthed the word "Kismet" very clearly.
===== END STORY zFMgPvMsESGHRapax =====

===== STORY id=uxd8Ezh4hfyda7kzB =====
Title: Tate Modern 2150
Author: GenericModel
Year: 2025
Karma: 15
WordCount: 2836
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/uxd8Ezh4hfyda7kzB/tate-modern-2150
-----
As Bea approached the Tate Modern on London-3, the first thing she noticed were the cooling CRACs and CDUs still freckling the grey cuboidal building. She supposed the datacenter aesthetic was appropriately grungy for a modern art building — it harkened back to a simpler time.

Jay — her date — had already indicated to her that he’d been here many times before. Sure, he was probably just signaling that he was cultured, and capable of abstract thought; but she figured she’d let him try to impress her. And it might be interesting to see what artists have been up to in the past 100 years. Frankly, she’d been too busy to keep up with the art world (it had been a hectic time!).

As they entered the dour-looking structure, Bea noticed a six-metre-long corridor in front of them. The ceiling, the floor, and both walls were covered with…

“Wait,” Bea said, “That doesn’t make any sense. Why are all these paintings of me, and my memories?”

“Oh,” said Jay, “So that’s what you see? Interesting. Maybe a little boring.” He raised an eyebrow.

Immediately correcting himself when he noticed Bea’s pout, “No! Don’t take it so personally,” he laughed, “I was just joking! That’s what most people see. I myself see the past more generally; the people that suffered so we could be so happy.”

Bea asked, “So how is it we see different things then?”

“It’s nano-telepathy. They use small robots to scan your brain when you enter, and feed your current neural patterns to an image model. You know, like how adverts work, except instead of trying to get you to buy something, it’s trying to get you to feel as deeply as possible. With a bias to the uplifting, moving, or sublime!”

At this, Bea turned to take in the artwork. She started to tear up. Out of the corner of her eye, she noticed Jay was as well. After staring at the corridors for 5 minutes — watching the images shift and render new and more moving images from her life (they seemed to be getting more moving over time… was it still reading her brain?) — they decided to move on, into the main lobby. Thankfully there was no artwork exhibited here, so she could collect herself after the corridor.

Bea noticed she was skeptical that Jay really saw ‘people who suffered for our happiness’, and wondered if it might have instead been something much more mundane.

“So, where should we go first?” Bea asked.

“Let’s see the well-known stuff, it’s your first time here! You have to see the greats!”

“It’ll all be new to me, just show me whatever you like the most”

“Well, the stuff I like’s a bit more niche… it’s maybe… Let’s just see the famous stuff! It’s famous for a reason: broad appeal, and all that!”

“Sure.” Bea said, noting the not-so-subtle neg.

Room 1
----------

The room they entered first was bright, well-lit. There was a box sitting on a plinth in the center. Next to the box was what looked like a hologram of an enormous structure — mountains were rendered next to it for scale. It was impressive, perhaps in the top 10% of structures you might find in any big city, in terms of craftsmanship. But bigger, much bigger than would be practical.

“What’s this?”

“Well,” said Jay, “They’re doing an exhibit at the moment. ‘Ways of Seeing.’ The point is basically that each room has a theme centered around different theories of artistic value.”

“Interesting,” said Bea. “So what’s this room supposed to represent, architectural value? Use value?”

“Nothing like that! This room’s theme is ‘Effort’. Basically, does art become more valuable because of the effort of the artist?”

Bea must’ve looked confused. “But this doesn’t take that much effort to build? I’ve seen structures much more impressive than this? Are the mountains much bigger than I’m thinking, or…?”

“No. The mountains are regular-mountain-sized,” Jay said. “You see that box, over there, next to the hologram?”

Bea glanced at the box again.

“Well, that box contained a civilisation about 20 years ago. That civilisation was simulated for 10 years, running at a speedup of 1000-times. The civilisation had a God, and that God was the artist of this piece… or, not artist… he called himself the ‘composer’” Jay gestured air quotes.

“The God answered prayers occasionally, made itself known in the world, moulded the civilisation. And released a Book. Now, that Book contained a bunch of random rules that people could argue and theologise about all day — to act as inspiration — but there were two core principles: Good Works please the God; and steam and coal are unholy.”

“Steam and coal are unholy…? I don’t see… Ahhh,” Bea said.

“Yes, exactly, no industry. And after 10,000 years, they managed to achieve this. Now it might not look like much to you, but this final structure took them 1500 years to build. Another 3000 for the decorations and facades. Whole kingdoms rose and fell deciding whether the columns should be Doric, Ionic, or Corinthian. At one point the Artist — sorry, the Composer — had to intervene because the theological disputes around minimalism and maximalism were getting out of hand.”

“I see,” said Bea. “Now that I know that… Nope, it still just looks like an extremely nice, big building. Just like most buildings, but bigger. I guess I just have the wrong baseline. It definitely adds something. But I don’t know if that makes it a much better-looking building. What other rooms are there?”

Room 2
----------

The next room had a big window on one side, and the walls were white. All the lighting came from the window, making the corners of the room slightly dim. In front of the window there were 10 marble stands. On each stand was etched what looked like some sort of chemical formula and a structure next to it, made up of Benzene rings. The one furthest to the left read:

 (6aR,9R)-N,N-diethyl-7-methyl-4,6,6a,7,8,9-hexahydroindolo\[4,3-fg\]quinoline-9-carboxamide
 
 Albert Hofmann, 1938

The rest had names that were far longer, and structures that seemed to be much harder to decipher. Most of them looked like honeycombs made by drunk bees — they were so filled with benzene rings and their respective offshoots.

“What is this?” Asked Bea, “Science as art perhaps…?”

“Nothing like that,” replied Jay, “This is the room focused on the viewer’s experience when perceiving the artwork. That plinth on the left, think of that as an homage to the original artists. Like Picasso paying homage to Lascaux — LSD is the Lascaux.”

“Huh?” said Bea, “They’re offering me LSD in order to… enhance the experience I have when I view other art in the museum? And a choice of other psychoactive drugs?”

“No,” said Jay, “The LSD isn’t really meant to be taken, it lasts for way too long, and you have no idea what you’ll even experience. I don’t even know if they have LSD here… No, the LSD serves as inspiration for the real artworks, those other drugs you see on the right, the ones labelled with different emotions.”

And sure enough, above the diagrams of molecular structure, Bea noticed that each plinth had a title. They were called things like: Monumental Achievement, Absolute Indifference, Why Alexander Wept, First Orgasm, Total Dissolution.

“What are they?” asked Bea

“They’re designer drugs, in a way. Not what used to be called designer drugs. These are drugs that have been designed to perfectly evoke a specific feeling in the user, by attaching to precisely the right neurotransmitters in precisely the right orders. These are trying to answer the question, is the value of art in the experience it evokes in the viewer — or I suppose, consumer.”

“Cool,” said Bea, “So they’re like Einheit. That drug that all the clubbers and ravers take.”

“Yeah, kind of... These generally evoke much more specific feelings than Einheit, but it’s the same principle. So, do you want to try any of them?” Jay asked.

“Sure,” Bea said, “I’ll try ‘Monumental Achievement,’ how long does it last?”

“Oh yeah… that’s the great thing,” said Jay, looking somewhat disappointed she hadn’t chosen a racier option, “You can decide, the half-lives are quite short, but they all have enormous LD50s, and taking more has diminishing returns pretty quickly, so you just tell the plinth how long you want it for, and it’ll dispense the right amount out of the top. You’ll feel the effects immediately.”

Bea walked up to the plinth and said “5 minutes,” and the plinth offered up a capsule filled with an off-white powder. She braced herself, and gulped it down.

She was waiting, waiting…

Nothing.

She looked at Jay.

“What? You don’t feel anything?” He asked.

“Nothing” said Bea, “Should I?”

“Yeah, definitely… Oh wait, is your brain totally… You know?”

“Is my brain what…? Natural?” Asked Bea defiantly, “Why should that matter? The answer is ‘Not really.’ But isn’t that everyone’s answer these days?”

“Of course, but it’s a matter of degree. It works using neurotransmitters, Bea! If you don’t have enough neurotransmitters, or have replaced most of them, then you have to tell the plinth you need the digital version, or some combination.”

“Ah,” said Bea. “Well, the moment’s passed anyway.”

Jay started expectantly, “You’re sure you don’t want to try any of…”,

“No,” interrupted Bea. “Let’s see one of the other rooms.”

Room 3
----------

Room 3 was much smaller, about four metres by four metres. Along the furthest wall from the entrance were a series of machines that looked sort of like matte-white tanning beds, but without any UV lights on the ‘ceiling’ or ‘floor’ of the bed.

Bea instantly recognised the beds, they were simulation machines. You could step in one and live an entirely different life, with varying degrees of awareness of the outside world. However, there was something slightly different about these tanning beds.

On them was written ‘Ceci n’est pas une vie.’

“So… what’s this room meant to represent? Is it ‘art as homage’?” Bea asked.

“Well, I suppose that’s a part of it,” said Jay. “Really, this room is kind of a two-for-one — maybe a three-for-one, if you count the homage aspect. This is subversion of expectations. See, it says ‘Ceci n’est pas une vie,’ on the machine where you can live an entire life. It’s surreal, the art comes from the juxtaposition.”

“But it’s not exactly that… special, is it? I mean, everyone has a machine like this? You don’t even need machines like this to simulate other lives anymore, you can do it easily at home. Kids can make them. Is it really worth having a simulated life in a museum?”

“Ah, and that’s the other part of it!” said Jay, “Maybe the art is just that it’s here, in a gallery. Sort of going for a Duchamp thing).”

“Right. I get it, so an artist takes something that any kid could make, puts it in a museum, and calls it art. I get it… Not my style.” said Bea.

“Fair enough,” said Jay. “Maybe you’d get it if you went in the machine… You know it’s Magritte’s life that you live, right?” Jay replied.

“No, I lived enough lives last weekend, and I can do a Magrittescapade whenever I want. I think I’d rather just see another room.”

“Alright. Alright. Nothing feels different about it being here, in a gallery?”

“Not really.” said Bea, and walked out.

Room 4
----------

Room 4 had one of its wall consisting of one big screen, subdivided into about 100 metre-long subsections. Each displaying what looked like 1960s era control-rooms and government offices. On one of the screens was a map of what looked like Earth-1, filled with a series of red dots in seemingly random places on the land, and a few in the sea.

“Alright,” said Bea. “I’m really stumped on this one. I suppose… 1960s, and government offices. So, something to do with JFK? Some twist on pop art? I don’t know.”

“Not a bad guess,” said Jay. “Based on the evidence you had. But no, it’s pretty different from that. Maybe art is participatory? It’s about the audience’s relation to the art piece. Art is created in the dynamic between piece and audience. Maybe looking at the wall behind you might give you more of a hint. This one is called ‘Cut Peace 1964’.”

Bea turned to look at the wall that was behind her as she walked in, and noticed a big red button, covered in an unlatched glass case, covered in another unlatched glass case, with the word “LAUNCH” written on it, in big black letters.

“Wait… the 60s, the Cold War, I get it…” said Bea slowly. “This isn’t a simulation of real people is it? It’s not an actual 1960s being run on repeat.”

“No…” said Jay sheepishly. “It’s not a simulation, but, well, the artist actually built a replica of the 1960s, and the people in it. It’s in orbit around Gliese 411.”

“How can this be allowed? Think of the suffering that happened in the 1960s!” Bea protested. “Maybe I should hit launch!”

“This piece has been here for 10 months, Bea.” sighed Jay, “Don’t you think if it was an actual replica, people would’ve followed your same thought process. No, all of the non-human animals are p-zombies, and anyone who starts suffering too badly gets a healthy dose of opium activated from a chip in the space between their toes… With one exception.”

“If I hit the launch button, it also stops the opium chips from working.” Bea deduced.

“Bingo.” said Jay.

“So, what? I’m supposed to just stand here and not do the obviously terrible thing? Is that what this piece is about?” asked Bea.

“Yeah, pretty much. Or you could do it?” said Jay, “I mean, no-one else has, and someone eventually probably will. Why not you?”

“Because I don’t want to be the person-” Bea started, “or be known as the person” she whispered, “who would destroy a perfectly happy civilisation for no reason other than ‘Art’. It doesn’t feel much like Art, it feels like the artist put a sword of Damocles over these people's heads and is asking us to swing it.”

“Well, no one has yet,” said Jay, “And if it makes you feel any better, the artist ran the simulation from 1930 to begin with. They put the sword of Damocles over their own heads just as much as she did. She’s down there too you know, I think she’s a waitress.” He paused and looked at the screen. “Oh yeah, that’s her, right there,” he pointed.

“Hmph” said Bea. “You know, I still really don’t like it, but I guess that makes me respect the Artist a little more. I still don’t see the value in it.” She looked around, and threw her hands up, “I’m just supposed to stand here in this empty room, or watch the boring control-rooms of the sixties, and not press a button?” she asked.

“Well, when the piece — ahem— finishes, that’s probably when it’ll be a bit more interesting.” said Jay.

“But I don’t WANT the piece to finish!” yelled Bea, “In fact, I really want to forget I ever saw this room. It should be illegal!” Bea stormed out.

“Well, I guess it got a reaction… .” said Jay, and followed her out.

Room 5 - The exit
---------------------

As Bea was storming out of the room, and then leaving the gallery entirely, Jay managed to catch up to her.

“One last piece,” he said. “You probably won’t like it, but I promise, you won’t regret you saw it like that last one. In fact, I think you might find it funny.”

Jay took Bea over to a tiny room — actually more like a closet — just off the side of the main lobby. Bea opened the closet doors to see…

"A certificate of Art?” Bea asked incredulously, “Given by the council of AI Art Connoisseurs,” she read.

“Yes, see ‘Connoisseurs’ ” said Jay, chuckling. “You know, I probably agree with you on this one. Is art that which is recognised as art by an authority?”

Bea continued to read aloud: “the AI Art Connoisseurs officially declare the empty space in this broom closet of the Tate Modern on London-3 to be Art.”

“That’s the silliest thing I’ve ever heard” she said.

“Yes, I quite agree, but perhaps for the opposite reason” said Jay. “I agree with the AIAC that the empty space in this Broom closet can be art. This certificate that says it is, in fact, art can also be part of the art. But no certificate makes it so.”

“You know,” said Bea, “That might be one thing you and I can agree on. This certificate certainly does not make this art!”

With that, Bea grabbed Jay’s hand, and strolled out of the building.
===== END STORY uxd8Ezh4hfyda7kzB =====