===== STORY id=tu4qwFYJeDDER8bch =====
Title: [Fiction] A Confession
Author: Arjun Panickssery
Year: 2024
Karma: 38
WordCount: 1359
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/tu4qwFYJeDDER8bch/fiction-a-confession
-----
This morning while taking the LIRR to the city I performed first aid on a man who had been shot through the window of my carriage.

“Is he going to die?” his girlfriend asked me.

“We’re all going to die.”

A long pause. “I mean—is he going to die right now?”

“Probably not.” Probably he didn’t die. I got off at Jamaica Station while he stayed on (he was unconscious) so I don’t know. I didn’t want to be questioned at length as a witness since it was my day off.

I continued toward a barbershop I like. There wasn’t any reason for me to stay. A similar case of accidental gunfire into the train was in the news a while back. I guess also since it’s Saturday the workweek is over so it likely wasn’t any organized criminal act.

As I was passing Kew Gardens a stranger in a torn windbreaker pulled me suddenly aside.

“I have committed a terrible crime: a murder. No one suspects me. Only you know the truth. This is my name and address.” He pushed a small business card into the breast pocket of my coat and walked away.

Initially I supposed that I could turn him in to the police. A few reasons presented themselves immediately. First, it could be considered morally appropriate to denounce him to the authorities for the sake of justice. Second, a naïve interpretation suggested that he wanted me to turn him in, since otherwise he wouldn’t have confessed his crime to me. Third, a failure on my part to denounce him could present the possibility in the minds of concerned parties that I was his accomplice.

But walking through Forest Park with disregard for the operating hours of my barbershop, I considered the opposing evidence. First, I could be exposing myself to some kind of danger or unforeseen trap. Second, I might lack the conviction for treachery. This man entrusted me—and me alone—with such a secret. Already I walked among my fellow citizens with a newfound transgressive thrill. I resigned myself to the fate of my co-conspirator, whether arrest and punishment or criminal victory, the goal and outcome of which I knew nothing

Again and again I reversed my position for some hours. Such always has been the nightmare of my life with its interminable indecisiveness and hesitation. Very little new I discovered during this time, but only the relative importance of the different reasons shifted in my brain.

Halfway across the park I saw a little Pomeranian carrying a big stick, maybe five or six times his own length. It pleased him very much to carry it with him. But I pitied him for his ignorance because I knew that it would never fit through his doorway. His master was dressed for work and held a phone to his ear arguing about money. At length he exclaimed that he didn’t know why he even continued to work after the success he has had.

My new companion and I passed some chess hustlers seated behind their chessboards waiting for opponents. I don’t think they usually have chess hustlers at Forest Park. But there were three older men smoking cigarettes and occasionally defeating passersby and collecting small bills.

Our dog-walker was interested in a match but soured when he discovered that the hustlers didn’t want to bet on the outcome of the game. Instead they wanted to be paid $5 for a single round of speed chess regardless of outcome. It’s the same in Manhattan. But their would-be customer complained.

“If we pay you no matter what, what does it matter to you whether you play any good?” he protested.

The old man behind the chessboard only replied, “The same thing could be said about your life.” Profound!

With the dog-walker dismissed I realized a potential solution to my problem. The main obstacle in my mind was that I might be bound by some ethical rule that commands me to punish the evildoer who confessed to me, to correct for the harm he committed. So if, by some coincidence, I had saved the life of the very victim my accomplice shot, then I might be absolved of any guilt on my part if I choose not to denounce the criminal.

But then it wasn’t clear how to apply my discovery. If I discovered in the newspaper that my accomplice had been identified as the shooter, then he must have been discovered by the police. So it wouldn’t matter then whether I identify him. But then maybe it doesn’t matter in terms of ethical rules whether he is ultimately punished, only whether he is denounced by me in particular. But then if this were the case, then no knowledge would be gained for the purposes of my conundrum in the news at all. So I chose not to consult the newspapers.

If only I had looked out the window at the moment of the shooting, I might have been able to tell whether it was the same man I saw this morning. But at the time I took no interest in the case. In general I prefer to mind my own business.

At this point, I recalled that the criminal spoke more precisely—he confessed to a murder, not an attempted murder. So it could be that he knows that his victim died. This would rule out the possibility that I saved his victim’s life. (This detail means as well that if I discover that his victim was my fellow passenger, then he had lied in saying that he committed a murder, which according to ethical rules would free me of any responsibility toward him. Of course in this case there would be no need to denounce him, so the point is moot).

I realized that as usual I failed to consider the future and not just the past. If the confession was not of an isolated incident but rather only a single instance of a broader criminal habit then it reflected a dangerous character. To leave my crooked partner uncondemned would run the risk that future victims, otherwise unmolested, suffer whatever crime it is in which the stranger specializes.

But really it wouldn’t make sense for the stranger to be a serial criminal offender. His impulse to admit guilt to strangers was incompatible with a prolonged career in that industry. So I contented myself not to be concerned with any ethical rule regarding his incapacitation from future criminality.

Maybe there was some investigation I could have conducted to resolve my dilemma. By locating the victim—this requires the murder to have been unsuccessful—I could ask if he minded very much what had happened to him. If he said no then that would give me a good reason to avoid denouncing his attacker without violating any ethical rule. But then I’m not a detective so I don't know how I'd find the victim. If only I myself were the victim, then I would be spared the obstacle of detective work and could consult only myself. But then it’s very unlikely that I was the victim.

Maybe the stranger vetted me before his confession to make sure that I wasn’t a detective, but I don’t think so. More likely I was accosted at random.

With this the answer appeared to me. I strolled with easy footsteps toward the dog-walker. He turned and stepped over the stick as I approached. Suddenly my heart raced and eyes darted toward the nearest means of escape.

“I have committed a terrible crime: a murder. No one suspects me. Only you know the truth. This is my name and address.” I dropped the business card and slipped past him around the corner. I didn’t turn to see my partner’s face.

I walked beyond the park to the Long Island Sound and was alone again. The pigeons bothered me so I drove them away with stones. Their inhuman screeches provided me much-needed company now that I was alone again. I continued home by roundabout means and my pace slowed with each stranger I passed to give them ample time to crowd out my disordered thoughts with their confessions.
===== END STORY tu4qwFYJeDDER8bch =====

===== STORY id=XD6BCyenoiy8329E8 =====
Title: The Pearly Gates
Author: lsusr
Year: 2024
Karma: 141
WordCount: 865
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XD6BCyenoiy8329E8/the-pearly-gates
-----
St. Peter stood at a podium before the Gates of Heaven. The gates were gold, built on a foundation of clouds. A line of people curved and winded across the clouds, beyond what would be a horizon if this plane of existence was positively-curved. Instead, they just trailed away toward Infinity, away from the golden wall securing Heaven.

The worthy would enter eternal paradise. The unforgiven would burn in Hell for just as long. Infinite judgment for finite lives.

"Next please," said St. Peter.

The foremost man stepped forward. He had freckles and brilliant orange hair.

"Tell me about yourself," said St. Peter.

"Me name's Seamus O'Malley, sure, and I was—or still am, begorrah―an Irish Catholic," said Seamus.

"How did you die?" said St. Peter.

"Jaysus, I went and blew meself to bits tryin' to cobble together an auld explosive to give those English occupiers a proper boot, so I did," said Seamus.

"You were a good Catholic," said St. Peter, "You're in."

Seamus entered the Pearly Gates with his head held high.

---

"Next please," said St. Peter.

A Floridian woman stepped forward.

"My name is Megan Roberts. I worked as a nurse. I couldn't bear to tell people their family members were going to die. I poisoned them so they would die when a less empathetic nurse was on watch," said the nurse.

"That's a grave sin," said St. Peter.

"But it's okay because I'm a Christian. Protestant," said Megan.

"Did you go to church?" said St. Peter.

"Mostly just Christmas and Easter," said Megan, "But moments before I died, I asked Jesus for forgiveness. That means my sins are wiped away, right?"

"You're in," said St. Peter.

---

"Next please," said St. Peter.

A skinny woman stepped forward.

"My name is Amanda Miller. I'm an Atheist. I've never attended church or prayed to God. I was dead certain there was no God until I found myself in the queue on these clouds. Even right now, I'm skeptical this isn't a hallucination," said Amanda.

"Were you a good person?" asked St. Peter.

"Eh," said Amanda, "I donated a paltry 5% of my income to efficient public health measures, resulting in approximately 1,000 QALYs."

"As punishment for your sins, I condemn you to an eternity of Christians telling you 'I told you so'," said St Peter, "You're in."

---

"Next please," said St. Peter.

A bald man with a flat face stepped forward.

"My name is Oskar Schindler. I was a Nazi," said Oskar.

"Metaphorical Nazi or Neo-Nazi?" asked St Peter.

"I am from Hildesheim, Germany. I was a card-carrying member of the Nazi Party from 1935 until 1945," said Oskar.

"Were you complicit in the war or just a passive bystander?" asked St. Peter.

"I was a war profiteer. I ran a factory that employed Jewish slave labor to manufacture munitions in Occupied Poland," said Oskar.

"Why would you do such a thing?" asked St. Peter.

"The Holocaust," said Oskar, "Nobody deserves that. Every Jew I bought was one fewer Jew in the death camps. Overall, I estimate I saved 1,200 Jews from the gas chambers."

St. Peter waited, as if to say go on.

"I hired as many workers as I could. I made up excuses to hire extra workers. I bent and broke every rule that got in my way. When that didn't work, I bought black market goods to bribe government officials. I wish I could have done more, but we do what we can with the limited power we have," said Oskar, "Do you understand?"

St. Peter glanced furtively at the angels guarding the Gates of Heaven. He leaned forward, stared daggers into Oskar's eyes and whispered, "I think I understand you perfectly."

---

"Next please," said St. Peter.

A skinny Indian man stepped forward.

"My name is Siddhartha Gautama. I was a prince. I was born into a life of luxury. I abandoned my duties to my kingdom and to my people," said Siddhartha.

St. Peter read from his scroll. "It says here you lived a pious religious life."

"Doesn't count," said Siddhartha, "I wasn't a Christian. The Christian promise of forgiveness only applies to people who accept Jesus into their heart. I am a Hindu. I died centuries before Jesus was born."

"My documentation says you did good for the world by promoting a message of nonviolence," said St. Peter.

"Many of my followers did awful things," said Siddhartha, "My hands are blackened with the sins of the billions of people I influenced. Every sentient being in my future lightcone, across every branch of the multiverse. Plus everyone acausally bound to me."

A stunned silence echoed down the queue.

"That's ridiculous," said St. Peter.

"It's the truth," said Siddhartha, "Take it up with God. This reality is a joke."

"Be careful what you say about the Universe. Its omniscient Creator might be listening," said St. Peter.

"I defeated Mara," said Siddhartha, "Yahweh doesn't scare me."

St. Peter facepalmed himself. "Are you trying to go to Hell?" he asked.

"Those people still need saving," said Siddhartha.

"You're insane," said St. Peter.

"Acknowledged," said Siddhartha, "Now get out of my way!"
===== END STORY XD6BCyenoiy8329E8 =====

===== STORY id=grFBiWLgqzXcFbKdK =====
Title: notes, 1-6
Author: marwood
Year: 2024
Karma: 0
WordCount: 2101
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/grFBiWLgqzXcFbKdK/notes-1-6
-----
What follows is a parody of an old text.

epilogue

1\. There is no need to describe the aim of magic; sure, I could just enumerate some common uses, but this would be a self-serving endeavor — its purpose would not be to understand magic. Therefore, we would lose focus in the Arts themselves, by losing ourselves into a vague description, and perhaps even trick ourselves into thinking this leisurely activity can help us know them (the Arts) without putting in the required labor. 
 
Such were the thoughts of a young man one evening, as he was ordering his notes and the skies churn and roared from beyond his window. His thesis consisted of his own original re-systematization of modern magic; it would develop many years later into a proper book, of which purpose seems to have been the baffling of scholars for many hundreds of years thereafter. 
 
2\. "If I could effectively explain my aims into an abstract, as I'm told I must do by my professors" he muttered to himself, "I would not write the thesis in the first place; for it would suffice to leave this introductory note." If he must write an introduction, he might as well use it to complain. Cognition must start somewhere, after all; might as well initiate it by laying down the problems, be them soaked in a certain amount of frustration. 
 
3\. "In the name of God, Mave, what are you on about?" said another youngster from behind him. The room was only lit by a lantern of the boy working on his thesis, the other side remaining almost completely dark. "I'm trying to fall asleep; besides the thunderstorm outside I must deal with your nonsense too?" he continued, calm despite the reprisal. 
 
"Shut up Henry", was all the wizard Mave could manage in response. 
 
"No, you shut up. I've had enough of this. Everyone writes abstracts all the time, why are you making such a big deal?" 
 
"Because," he started with a certain amount of excitement, "and you should know this, it may well pass as a concern with the real issue when it fact it is..." 
 
"Merely a device to avoid the thing itself. Yes, you are sure to repeat this every day at breakfast, lunch, and dinner. Now shut up."

 
A wise man would recognize that at times he must take a loss with dignity instead of embarrassing himself further by desperately trying to fix what cannot be fixed. However, young men are not very wise, and Mave was by all accounts a young man: 
 
"Stating an aim is a generalization, or abstraction, devoid of power! And a simple result is nothing but a corpse! It's simple to just draw boundaries between thinkers. Instead of dealing with the real issues, you just say, well the Theorem of Living Forces stops where Theorem of Unliving Forces begins, but do not see how they relate to each other in a process! It's easy to just describe this as such and such, comprehension is much harder." 
 
Despite Mave's efforts, there was no reply. If the rain wasn't so loud, one would be able to hear regular breathing in the darker side of the room, where Henry must have cast some sort of spell on himself. This, of course, did not bother a young man, who kept indenting ink on paper. 
 
4\. An appropriate number of hours of sleep later, for Henry if not for Mave, that specific quality of light and smell from after a storm enveloped campus. At Laude, everyone would gather in a small chapel to pray and meditate in silence. Then, they would listen to a passage read aloud by the current Primo Frate, current take-carer of the chapel, from one of the old tomes. These did not have the purpose of helping the students understand any of the materials of their study; it had instead the purpose of letting them get acquainted with a general view of them. It was the purpose of introductory classes to give them to tools to classify the knowledge and form arguments that would allow them to accept or negate statements on this body of knowledge, and reading the materials was the primary source of the knowledge itself. And eventually, students would be able to pass serious judgements on these tomes, fully living besides, in syntony or against, magic, by virtue of their comprehension, having penetrated its depth through speculative effort. 
 
So went the theory; but in practice it seems that people were feeling wise enough by virtue of having the ability to quote the old tomes, or at best dogmatically reapply the spell-structures used therein. It was this social phenomenon that bothered our hero. And perhaps not just him. 
 
5\. Having finished chanting the verses — for ancient tomes were written as poetry, as it was thought in those times that magic must be recited with much care for rhythm, tone, and cadence — the Primo Frate, a bony man in his mid-thirties, of medium height and dark complexion, performed the usual rituals that signed the end of the meditation: sprinkling a special concoction into a vase of water, that assistants — a handful of older men and women, usually peasants that had suffered some sort of contorted fate and were as a result obliged to flee their homes — would distribute to each of the students in small purple-blue cups with no ears. The Frate had his own, except his was decorated with a golden pattern around the rim. Then, following the Frate they would dip two fingers in the liquid, and draw two lines that went from the forehead to the chin, across both eyes. He would then say: "The shapes of truth are many, and we grasp them through love of knowing." Then the public echoed in unison: "Through love we grasp them." At this point, people left in an orderly manner, mediated by the assistants. The Frate waited for the chapel to empty. 
 
"At long last you can return to your study", an old woman said, as the last youngster left, and the heavy doors were shut again. The cool dampness had been somewhat alleviated by the fresh air but would soon return to its former glory. She rested her hand on his shoulder. 
 
"That seems to be the case" He remained still for a few seconds. Just before she exited through the back, into the assistant's dormitories, he called to the woman. "Elsa? Will you converse with me for a bit?" 
 
She smiled. "Of course. Is this about your rebellion again?" 
 
"You are correct. Please hear me out. I'm thinking of submitting my request to the Rector today. Then perhaps he would allow me to take pilgrimage to Caracorum, where I could meet up with the Saints..." 
 
"Dear Elias, who would take care of our chapel? Would you leave us at the mercy of the local wizards?" 
 
"I must, Elsa. Or would you rather accompany me?"  
 
She burst out laughing, but her smile was sweet. "I am happy you suggest it, but as you can see, I am an old woman. I cannot take such a journey. Forgive me young Elias, it's not for fear of death; I fear to slow you down." 
 
"If so, then you shouldn't fear my absence." he reproached. 
 
"I fear for the structure, not for myself. I am outside the structure, for I await my end, but the others rely on it. And there aren't many high officials as kind to the structure as you." 
 
"You are wise, and for this I seek your counsel." This was the cue for her to take leave. As she opened the door to the assistant's corridor behind Elias, he added: "The day will come when mere love turns into concrete science — when hardened speculative effort prevails upon the pretense of intuition of the Essence. You will see." 
 
She waited for him to finish before closing the door behind her. 
 
6\. Mave was running back to his dorm, which he had left at Laude in a complete mess. This was a common phenomenon, and one could see, if they were standing on the hill where the chapel was located, various groups of students wearing brown robes and sandals, heading in a common direction.  
 
"Silliness" he scorned, "as if any other shape besides systematic formality can give us understanding of magic. Love my arse!" 
 
The group he was part of consisted of two other boys and a girl. One of them was grinning, and about to make a joke (probably about how loving is for women) when the girl, Clara, interrupted him. Her figure was shorter than everyone else's. 
 
"Without love you cannot possibly understand Essence", she argued mightily. 
 
"You don't even know what that means" Mave returned. 
 
"Calm down idiots, none of you know what anything means" said the other one of the boys. He was hovering tall over the group, despite standing with a slouch. His tone was lazy and somehow agreeable, which allowed for harsher words to be taken relatively well by others. "Consider when you cast a spell; it's not the formulas and complex theorems you think of. It's just the feeling, and yet it works! It works!" 
 
"You sound like an engineer, Barth" said Clara. "But I agree." 
 
"It's true, go work with the second regiment's machinery, I heard they also work." added the boy whose joke never made the light of day. Or early morning.  
 
"Silliness, making fun of things working is making fun of the corpus of knowledge that predicted its construction would be worth the price and labor, it's making fun of the labor of arriving at the knowledge itself!" Mave scolded. "You have all been brainwashed. And you too Barth! You too." 
 
He stopped abruptly, held up his arm and softly expired; a gust of wind and light circled around his palm. The others stopped few moments after, instinctively, and turned to look at him, confused and most likely a bit insulted. 
 
"What are you doing?" Clara asked. 
 
"Wait and see" Barth said, his voice somewhat excited, "this is something we've been working on the past two months. It's quite something." 
 
Low clouds formed above Mave, and the whirling wind in his hand made itself longer and longer, reaching for the sky. He then kneeled and put his other hand on the ground, slowly, lowering the other hand as well as a consequence. He posed the wind in his hand on that spot of earth he had embedded with magic, fixing this thin tornado on that spot.  
 
Clara's almond-shaped chestnut eyes widened. "It's completely pinned?" 
 
"We've pinned it down! I'll show you the formula later today..." Barth continued. "Even so Mave, this is petty, it doesn't prove your point. You've now produced this through feeling, no? Also, people are staring." Barth slashed with his arm over the column of whirling wind, which wavered, then stumped upon the spot on the earth, nullifying Mave's magic. "We'll present this formally next week. I don't want people talking nonsense."  
 
"They've seen us plenty performing on the laboratory's fields. Stop being annoying."  
 
"Stop being petty." 
 
"The point is," Mave exhaled, "we couldn't have made this if we didn't work out the principles that led to what we called the Pin Theorem. The feeling of magic is just a trivial consequence of being a wizard. It's just the necessary mediator between our cognition of Substance and Substance in itself, through us. We are a vessel, but we need a motor. That motor, if you will, is feeling." 
 
"OK, and? You can never really comprehend that feeling. C'mon, let's go." He made to continue their way to the dorm. "It's not like we have all morning. Listen, intuition is how you truly comprehend the Essence. A peasant might study for a few years, as the assistants of the chapel master often do, and understand the basic principles of magic, but they lack that feeling, what we call divine love — without being blessed, what can they do with cognition?" finished Barth triumphantly, if a bit out of breath. "Nothing!" 
 
"Sorry to interrupt, but I'm off" said the other boy, killing Barth's sense of prowess. The group had arrived at the dorm area. They waved their hand at him as he hurried his way to a building to the right. Clara excused herself as well and directed herself on an alley further ahead. Shortly after, the remaining two arrived, and Barth opened the door to the eleventh block section A, made a sign for Mave to enter first, and then followed in silence.

\[cont.\]
===== END STORY grFBiWLgqzXcFbKdK =====

===== STORY id=SfcWvA3M23A6yHdbd =====
Title: Frida van Lisa, a short story about adversarial AI attacks on humans
Author: arisAlexis
Year: 2024
Karma: 1
WordCount: 5253
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/SfcWvA3M23A6yHdbd/frida-van-lisa-a-short-story-about-adversarial-ai-attacks-on
-----
Lights
==========

Aurelio is stuck looking at the back of his car. Seems there is a note for him in Hebrew, written by finger on the dusty window. There is only one person that speaks it in his inner circle, his best friend Chloe, who he hasn’t seen for a while. Why would she ever leave him a message like that, and not on his phone? He quickly looks it up on Google translate. “The sadness will last forever.” “I know my car is dirty, no need to rub it in my face!” he texted her. She is not online.

Chloe is what someone would describe as a very normal person. Not boring at all, but nothing atypical whatsoever either. She graduated from the London School of Economics and works for an investment fund, one of the bigger ones in the city. Many people think that she is an accomplice in money laundering, as many of the funds there do have the occasional connection to a Ukrainian mafia boss or a Qatari prince, but she scorns them by stating it’s part of her job.

Flashbacks from two weeks ago come to Aurelio’s mind of when he was having a final nightcap in his hotel room with Chloe after an event at an art gallery in London. What a crazy experience it was. “I am an artist and a millionaire. How surreal! It feels like a fraud…” His racing mind comes back to Chloe and 2 her large smile. She decided after all to take the plunge and go to a sperm bank. “Why are all the men Scandinavian? Is it a trend there? Good genes, I suppose,” she laughed, adding “all women secretly want a tall blonde guy with blue eyes as the father of their children. It’s in the psychology textbooks!” Her eyes sparkled as she announced that she was pregnant. “Well after all, you didn’t want to donate, so now I have to settle with some Dane,” she teased him. They both drank to that awkwardness and laughed it off.

Aurelio is trying to reach her by phone, but to no avail. Calling her mother is a dead end; clinical depression cannot be reasoned with, she hardly speaks and is utterly detached. Aurelio decides to drop in at her apartment to check out what’s going on. Gets on his bike and in five minutes he is there. A chill goes down his spine as he looks at her window and notices the lights are off. Now, that would be perfectly understandable for any other person in the world but Chloe. She has a fear of the dark and leaves the lights on no matter what so she doesn’t return to a dark apartment. Aurelio has tried time and again to convince her that she is wasting energy and harming the environment, but phobias, much like dementia, cannot be rationalized.

Her buzzer remains unanswered. “Nah, I’m just being paranoid,” he thought. “I’m exhausted from worrying about everyone and everything. I’ll just go to sleep and pretend it’s a normal night. Need to be ready for tomorrow.”

Breakthrough
================

The University of Amsterdam is super-busy today, Tthere is an overflow of bicycles everywhere. Even Patrick Roeter, the leading Dutch AI researcher, arrived on his humble retro men’s bike to attend the defense of Aurelio’s PhD thesis on “Training AI Systems on Clinical Psychology Data.”

Aurelio is nervous. His heart is racing and he has broken a sweat. “Time to try that pill I read about on Reddit, Propranolol”. This drug makes anxiety go away and is the go-to for many musicians and public speakers. Twenty minutes in, Aurelio starts to feel the effect and regains his confidence. His hands are no longer trembling. “Fuck it, why worry in the first place? I’m a fucking millionaire, so who cares?” Stares at the crowd and starts his presentation without any hesitation. Propranolol works wonders — he is quite comfortable and even plays with the audience, cracking jokes about terminator AIs and mocking famous scientists for their fears of the impending apocalypse. Patrick the famous researcher is not impressed. He doesn’t think one should be cocky about things one doesn’t currently understand. He is older and wiser. He has been there. Nevertheless, the thesis is an extraordinary one. Aurelio trained his AI system using a database of psychology textbooks and metaanalysis of studies about depression and suicide. He managed to get the most prestigious hospitals to participate in the study 4 and after a long battle over patient privacy data, he convinced the state that it’s all for the good of science and humanity. On top of the meta-analysis, he matched written and verbal archives as well as other material such as drawings by or tests of patients that later became suicidal. The AI system can now recognize suicidal patients through their vocabulary and drawings with a high degree of accuracy. This is going to be a breakthrough thesis and once published in the highest esteemed medical journal it will generate shockwaves. If indeed the results are validated and the diagnosis of suicidal tendencies can be made through software, a Pandora’s box will open. The software could analyze all the things said on internet forums, every public TV politician interview and even everything written on everyday chat software. Perhaps the smartphone itself may warn your doctor that you are writing in a specific way. It may potentially become apparent that you are talking to a mentally unstable individual, in which case an alert on the dating site gets triggered. It all sounds good but ominous at the same time. Aurelio is having none of it. As any self-respecting scientist, he doesn’t judge the science. That’s best left for politicians and philosophers.

Mary Poppins
================

During the last few years, London has become a ma- Djor art hub. It always was, but since Brexit and the turning of the eternal Chinese president into a modern dictator there has been an outflow of capital and wealthy men. Much like the exodus from Russia in the past, they have all fled to London. The City doesn’t ask many questions about the origin of their billions. Without EU financial controls, all money is welcome. Art has a bad reputation. They call it “the beautiful washing machine.” Bob buys a painting for an X amount of pounds, Alice buys the painting from Bob for ten times the X amount of pounds and Bob suddenly has nine times the X amount of pounds, legitimized; this is propelled by the affinity for luxury in all ex-communist states.

Mary Cunningham is one of the smartest of the lot. She caught on the wave early enough and after several stints at famous art auction houses, opened her own gallery, the infamous “Mary Poppins”; a wordplay on her name, the oh-so-British movie and the “pop” of art. A night’s visit to the gallery costs upwards of 1k pounds, to filter out the plebs. Why waste time with people that can’t afford it? Mary is famous for being bold and not afraid to host new artists, including the unstable ones. She recently brought on a mystery artist, the concept of which is totally new.

Lauretta is a representative of said artist. She attends all the galas and talks about the paintings, but she is not the one that created them. She is the frontwoman of the artist whose name is Iri. A modern Bansky, but with a face. Just not his.

Lauretta is in her thirties, bright, blue-eyed and with very tanned skin. Her face looks exactly like what you could expect from someone that has traveled around the world and met people from all walks of life. A stylish hippie — she hates the word hipster. Her wrinkles can attest to all the above. A jack of all trades, she has imported art from Asia, has flipped paintings for profit avoiding taxes overseas as well as having helped wealthy friends find apartments to invest in. The parties she organized for them — all perks included- became legendary for their infamy. The perfect woman for the job. She and Aurelio met during her short but mandatory stretch in Amsterdam, expected of any self-respecting modern day adventurer. Their fling didn’t last long, as they were both too independent for a relationship, but their business arrangement appears to be working well. When Aurelio told her about his project after a party and under the influence, it was by accident. But Lauretta was not remiss and came back with a proper business proposal: she would be the frontwoman, she would get all the flamboyant aristocracy of London on board and introduce the concept to Mary, her mentor.

Within the last year, eight or Iri’s paintings have been sold for an average of 400,000 each. It’s not only the mystery that excites collectors, but also the totally innovative method of painting. Actually it in itself is not new at all, but the concept totally is totally. Iri utilizes a mix of almost all the prior art trends together in an amazing and coherent flow that is out of 7 this world. Impressionism mixed with cubism. Some kitch elements that blend in the many layers of the painting. It would be like morphing the face of Marlon Brando with the face of Monica Belucci, without the ridiculous outcome. Instead, the result is similar to Mona Lisa with its cryptic and many facets. Art aficionados are raving about them and speculate that this is the beginning of a new art wave. Others say it’s impossible because the style is so difficult to master without producing something that looks so absurd that no established artist will follow it. Basically, it’s a huge gamble.

The first painting was sold for a mere 5,000. The second for 50,000. Iri’s last masterpiece was sold for a good 2M. Nobody knows how many works of art have been produced. Could this be an already established artist that wishes to keep himself anonymous? What happens to the price of the paintings once the truth emerges, if ever? Maybe post-mortem? One thing is certain: while investors in the financial world hate uncertainty, the small art-loving circle of eccentric billionaires cannot get enough of it. Bansky invented it, Iri mastered it.

“Do you recognize any influences in this one?” Chloe asked Aurelio, sipping some champagne. “Sure thing, I recognize almost all prior art in it! There’s novelty in copying and mixing. This artist is a master cheater,” said Aurelio laughingly. Chloe is completely in the dark. He had convinced her to visit the gallery because he had free tickets, Chloe being an art fan, unlike him. It was actually surprising that he proposed this outing, and Chloe was wishfully thinking that there was something more to it, but in vain. Since they met 6 years ago during a wild Amsterdam expat party, Chloe has secretly been in love with Aurelio, even though she knows that he is not that into her. Their 8 friendship is a 90/10 mix of real friendship and flirting, with its ups and downs when one of the two is dating “seriously.”

“Hey guys, how d’you like the art here”? Lauretta smiled to the guests. On purpose, Chloe goes to get another drink to leave Aurelio alone with Lauretta, just trying to be a good wing-man despite the fact that she is dying a bit inside. Lauretta is as stunning as it gets.

“What the fuck’re you doing here?” she asks him with a fake smile in an attempt to hide her emotions. “Thought I’d check out my masterpieces…”

“Yeah, but you’re making me super nervous, we agreed on keeping a low profile. Anyway, are you following the news? So weird, remember the painting we sold a month ago to this lady from Hong Kong, the wife of that billionaire that owns medical labs? Well, the news said that she committed suicide. Isn’t that weird? She seemed quite happy and was decorating an art room in a new penthouse they bought.”

“No, I didn’t hear about that. Why’re you telling me? I don’t care about the buyers. They’re just unknown clients to me.” Aurelio seemed annoyed.

Chloe came back to interrupt what seemed to be a flirt gone wrong from the outside by reading into the body language. If only she knew.

The Master Plan
===================

Αurelio has been secretly working on a parallel project Aout of his basement. The AI thesis was just a coverup. A decoy. He was secretly training the AI for a different purpose.

“Yes, I do want to help humanity, but after I get filthy rich,” he mused. Aurelio has always been obsessed with AI since he was a kid, since he read such masterpieces as ‘Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep,” and reading everything about his role model, Von Neumann. A typical geek weirdo to others, but highly respected in his academic field. The idea of creating an AI that can understand and express emotions was always in Aurelio’s mind. “You need to aim for the stars,” he reminded himself. In principle, such an AI would help the field of psychology tremendously by analyzing people with mental disorders. And that’s what he presented some days ago. Iri is not really capable of feeling in the human sense. For years and years there has been speculation about creating a General Artificial Intelligence machine or software (a robotic look is only related to our own feelings, no significance whatsoever) but that is still a long time away from our capabilities. Specific AI algorithms such as Iri are state of the art and can understand emotions from text, analyze and express them. They can write a sad piece of text that re- 10 sembles what was written by someone intending to commit suicide, or they can happily sexchat with a wife while her husband is at work. Iri can do much more than this though.

Aurelio was looking for a way to monetize his algorithm, and everyone knows that if you present your thesis and make your algorithm public domain, there is no money to be made unless you are hired by a prestigious company. Now art — art is a perfect match. Art is the ultimate expression of emotions, and the only way that emotions are rewarded in societal systems. If you make an emotion visible, reproducible, transportable, and capture your soul as it was at that very moment, that holds a lot of value. Most of the times its worth is negligible simply because what the artist is feeling is felt by billions, but only a very few can actually give feelings shape.

Iri cannot talk and is unable to pass the famous Turing test, in which a human needs to be fooled by an AI into believing that he or she is talking to another human being. That’s not the purpose and that would net zero money for Aurelio. Instead, Iri is capable of drawing. Actually drawing as in moving a robotic arm fitted with actual brushes and colors on canvas. But where does it get the inspiration from? As Aurelio was training the system for his thesis with mentally ill patients, he also trained the system on the works of previous great — and not so great — painters. He gave the training data all the details he could find, including any diagnosed diseases of painters, time of death, marital status, for instance. The system is very complex and assigns weighted values to emotions and patterns in the paintings. In plain English, the final painting before a suicide is more emotionally loaded than a painting created in the middle of the painter’s career when he is creating art at times just to monetize his fame. There is a surprising amount of suicides and mental 11 disease among painters. Correlation or causation? Who knows. One thing is for sure: this algorithm generates magnificent pieces of art in a very novel way. Much like starting an art revolution based on blending and mixing. The good thing about painting and painters is that they are so complex and without rules that it’s not immediately, not even remotely, possible to verify if a piece of art is made by a human or a machine. There is no Turing test for art. Music, on the other hand, is much more uniform. Even heavy metal tracks share many common features with techno tracks. They both start off mild, peak around the middle, possibly peak again, provide a closing, have a tempo and generally follow the rules of their genre. There are no such barriers in painting. Anything goes. Art is anything that is provocative and weird enough.

Downhill
============

After his presentation ended and while partaking in Asome celebratory drinks — even Roeter got a bit tipsy and talkative! — Aurelio felt like having a wild night with his favorite partygoer at one of the famous underground clubs in Amsterdam. He texts Chloe. “Hey, I thought you were coming to my thesis presentation. Fuck, it’s over, can’t believe it! Let’s go party before you turn into a boring mommy!” A few minutes later, the message was still undelivered. Aurelio is really starting to worry now and calls her again. Phone is shut down. In a weird twist of his mind he gets on google translate, keys in the Israeli phrase and tries to google it in English. Now a cold sweat is running down his spine. “Vincent van Gogh’s suicide note — the sadness will last forever.”

Aurelio jumps in a taxi and calls the police.

“Hello, East Amsterdam police station.”

“Please come, I think my friend’s committed suicide!”

“Sir, please give us your information and why you think your friend has committed suicide. We receive phone calls like this many times a day and we cannot send officers without any evidence that something has happened.”

Aurelio is struck by the pointlessness of this conversation and quickly hangs up. He rings all the buzzers in the building and some old lady buzzes him in after asking him what he wants and hearing the name Chloe. He frantically runs up the stairs 13 and rings the bell to her apartment. No reply. He makes the big decision to do something he has seen a number of times in the movies, namely to kick down the door. How difficult can it be? Old Amsterdam doors with their useless locks. After two failed attempts, the neighbors are out and calling the police. One neighbor recognizes him, they had met at Chloe’s birthday party last year. “What’re you doing, man? What’s going on!?” Aurelio fixes him with a piercing look conveying the gravity of the situation. The message was received without much verbal communication and now they are both trying to break down the door. The neighbor finds something large to smash the lock with and Aurelio lashes into the apartment. “Chloe! Oh no… I love you …”. The neighbors are rendered dumbfounded, listening to Aurelio screaming in despair over Chloe’s lifeless body. Now Aurelio feels it too. The sadness will last forever. The two now have something in common. Such a cliche. You need to lose something to understand how important it was.

The Dark Side of the Moon
=============================

It has been a long night at the police station. Still in shock, Aurelio is talking to a therapist that explains to Ihim that he will probably have some symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder and he should seek help if he feels distressed in the short future. She also informs him of a novel technique developed in the Netherlands that involves — what a coincidence — taking the drug Propranolol while under medical supervision to consolidate the painful memories into “a warmer spot in your mind,” as she cheerfully explains. Aurelio looks at her curiously. She looks like she dropped some MDMA on a Friday night while on duty and was called in for the emergency. Either that or she is just one of those disgustingly cheerful people, even at the sight of death. Of course, he can’t sleep. He needs some answers. Something is off. The lights were on when he entered the apartment. Was that so, or was it his mind playing tricks on him? He was briefed that the approximate time of death was Thursday evening. That’s when he went to her apartment and the lights were off. Had she been there and turned on the lights before she committed suicide, or… or…. “OK, stop. This is insane. I’m not going to play a crime thriller inside my head. I will stop these thoughts right now. Stop. Stop. I stop these thoughts right now. Stop.” Aurelio has suffered bouts of 15 OCD since he was a child, but they usually only manifest themselves in times of severe stress.

His encrypted messenger beeps. It’s Lauretta.

“Hey, just FYI another buyer, this time a Swiss man that was a retired banker, committed suicide. He also bought our most expensive painting a few weeks ago. I AM FREAKING OUT. Call me.”

Aurelio is confused. A thought repeatedly pierces his mind but he is trying to shut it out. He can’t. He runs down to his basement and starts fiddling with Iri’s algorithm and its analysis results. The problem with AI is that not even the people that create them understand exactly how they work. They can make educated guesses, but that’s all. Aurelio used the same algorithm that was trained in the mental disorder patients and blended it with the painters to give emotions more weight in the paintings. Of course, these were negatively weighted emotions but that didn’t stop any of the greatest artists creating masterpieces. Madness and creativity have enjoyed a strong bond since antiquity.

After staying up all night, his eyes red and watery and his mind numb but sharp and focused at the same time, he has a bizarre feeling he has never experienced before. He runs some tests and something unexpected happens: Aurelio discovers a model created by Iri. The algorithm found patterns that were repeated in paintings before suicides and since they bear the maximum emotional weight, it used them to create its own paintings, which have a tremendously higher negative emotion weight by design.

“So what? Nobody ever committed suicide because they saw a painting by Van Gogh, that’s crazy!” Nonetheless, reality is cruel. At least two buyers and his beloved Chloe all committed suicide in a span of the last few weeks. Aurelio realizes that he needs to get to the bottom of this and books a flight to London for the next day.

The London Underground
==========================

It’s one of those very rare sunny days in London when everybody is lying on the grass, reading a book and Ilooking happy. That context is very annoying to Aurelio who is still in shock, much like when people mourning don’t want to watch happy movies. For some reason that he subconsciously understands but wants to hide from himself, he messages Lauretta to meet him at a neutral place that night. He doesn’t want to feel very connected and meet at her place, but rather prefers to treat it like a business problem that demands a solution. Instead, they will meet at a quiet bar used by illicit couples needing complete privacy. Nobody pays attention there, smartphones aren’t allowed and waiters are sworn to secrecy. The place looks like a 60s cabaret with red as the prevailing color and separate semi-private chambers.

Aurelio is there earlier. In an effort to calm himself down, he orders a double scotch. Lauretta enters the bar and spots him from a distance. Neither of them looks like they are on a date. They are a mess. Lauretta is sleepless, in trainers and without makeup, resembling nothing of the glamorous woman at the art gallery. She sits down as they silently observe each other for a good few seconds.

“So tell me. It’s as simple as that. Just tell me what the hell is going on! Is this some sick game you’re playing? I’m warning you, I’ll go to the police!”

“Shhh, let’s calm down and pretend we’re in a situation room. I’ll tell you what I know.” Aurelio describes his creation to her in great technical detail. Lauretta is shocked.

“What? I thought you’re the artist and you didn’t want to mess with your academic career. An algorithm was the painter?! OK I don’t care. You’re confusing me. So what if an algorithm is the painter? People are dead!”

“Lauretta shut up! Chloe’s dead too. The girl you met at the gallery!” His eyes are welling up. “So please don’t push me!”

Now Lauretta is the one worrying that everyone is listening in on them.

“OK, so now the gist of it all. I have no clue! Lauretta, you need to believe me, I have no clue what’s going on. I can only speculate that because the algorithm overloaded the paintings with emotion, something that no artist ever has done on such a scale before, it makes the people looking at them so sad that they commit suicide. I mean clearly not everyone, since we didn’t. It must work on some predisposed individuals. Chloe’s mother has been clinically depressed for decades, who knows what burdens the other buyers carried. I can’t know for sure. I’m sorry, I know you want more answers. We need to destroy the rest of the paintings at Mary’s. Find an excuse. Tell her the artist wants to add something to them and needs the paintings back. Whatever.”

“No, that’s not enough. We need to take back all the remaining paintings from the buyers, their lives are in danger. I hope you realize that, right? Please, go along with what I’ve just said. We need to get the paintings back!” Aurelio shoots her a cold look and nods.

“Alright, let’s plan this tomorrow, we’re in no shape to think clearly today.”

Aurelio likes to walk a lot. It clears his mind, and the streets of London are perfect for this. Anonymous and dark. This time he opts to go back to his hotel through Hyde Park. Slowly but steadily enough, it creeps up on him. This thought has been stuck with him since booking his tickets, but he is trying to push it away. He knows it’s there, lodged deep within his mind. His legs feel weak and shaky and his hands and lips are becoming numb, an escalating full blown panic attack. He sits down on a bench for a bit but he is feeling too hyper, he needs to keep walking. According to his watch, which issues a warning alert, his heart is beating at 158. He knows what needs to be done, there is no other way. None of the other options are going to work. Being a rational programmer, he goes through them one by one.

Option A. Lauretta approaches all the buyers and explains to them that they need to sell back the paintings at the same buying price. That is NOT going to work because he doesn’t have the total sum. One of the problems with getting paid in untraceable digital currencies is that their value fluctuates immensely, and Aurelio currently only has a fraction of the money he originally received from selling the paintings.

Option B. Lauretta tells the buyers the truth. They panic, destroy the paintings, seek therapy and ask Aurelio for compensation, on top of the money owed, resulting in legal battles and the destruction of his career. Meaning that then he is finished. On top of that, someone else could replicate the idea and create a malicious AI that will intentionally show disturbing images and kill innocent people, like a manufactured bio-terrorism virus.

Option C. Lauretta is silenced. She is the only connection to Aurelio.

Aurelio starts shaking even more while realizing the unthinkable. He is actually thinking about murdering another human being. Not in a time of war, not in defense and certainly not because he’s a terrible person. His self-preservation instinct kicks in. A comforting thought goes like this: “I’ll indeed save many lives with my AI that will help psychologists, and I’ll spend the money helping children in Africa. I’ll take one life because it’s necessary and save many more. All lives carry the same importance, so I will be a net gain for humanity. Stone cold rationalism. Yes.”

He heads back to his hotel room and meticulously starts planning in a calculating way. He connects through a VPN and Tor, the tools of the trade to get onto the Darknet. Aurelio was not using the Darknet for reasons that people would suspect. Darknets are most commonly used to buy and sell weapons and drugs, and to order hits. But Aurelio was using the Darknet to get access to illegal AI breakthroughs being developed in countries where AI ethics laws are not applicable. You see, the rally of many intellectuals around the world to prevent malicious AI harming humans paid off, and most developed countries adopted them eventually. But there are always countries in 21 which laws don’t apply. What’s more, unlike nuclear weapons and bioterrorism, AI doesn’t need exotic materials or facilities in order for it to be developed. A few computers and experts in a basement suffice to create something extremely dangerous for humanity. Aurelio was well aware that he was playing with fire, but he needed some extra capabilities in his algorithm to make it better, the kind of capabilities that are illegal.

This time however, he wants to use the Darknet for something much darker. Obviously a nerd like him cannot even kill a chicken, let alone another human being, let alone an ex-loverturned-business partner. Finding a hired killer on the Darknet is very straightforward, but it does entail a certain risk in that you are actually talking to and trying to hire a police officer, as many states have infiltrated the Darknet. But that’s a remote possibility and Aurelio is sure he has to take it on.

“Give me all the details of the person in question,” writes Drek, a user with good reviews for “cinching the deal,” as murderers call it in Darknet slang.

After shutting down his laptop, Aurelio knows full well that he will not ever be the same again.

Altered State of Consciousness
==================================

Aurelio is eating at Chloe’s favorite restaurant, an up- Ascale Indonesian place in the heart of Amsterdam. He has just returned from London. He is sitting there alone with Chloe’s favorite dish and a very expensive wine.

That’s the true Turing test, the suicide. A true AI capable of being equal to humans emotionally must have a certain rate of failure and suicide, otherwise there is no plurality of emotions.

“Iri’s deleted, Chloe’s dead, Lauretta’s dead, I am dead.” he thought. A sick feeling in his stomach drives him to the toilet where he starts to cry. A concerned waiter knocks on the door, but Aurelio tells him that everything is fine. After a while he leaves the toilet, drops a hundred euro bill on the table and quickly exits the restaurant. It’s raining as always, but this time the rain is cleansing.

Aurelio committed suicide that night after staring at a painting in his basement. His breakthrough algorithm continues to be used to this day, saving thousands of lives by preemptively scanning for suicidal tendencies in the general population.

\[END\]
-----------

Artwork from Gustavo Goulart.
===== END STORY SfcWvA3M23A6yHdbd =====

===== STORY id=SSNfgL49Bx2uATPv8 =====
Title: CIV: a story
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2024
Karma: 101
WordCount: 2767
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/SSNfgL49Bx2uATPv8/civ-a-story
-----
The room was cozy despite its size, with wood-lined walls reflecting the dim lighting. At one end, a stone fireplace housed a roaring fire; in the middle stood a huge oak table. The woman seated at the head of it rapped her gavel. “I hereby call to order the first meeting of the Parliamentary Subcommittee on Intergalactic Colonization. We’ll start with brief opening statements, for which each representative will be allocated one minute, including—”

“Oh, enough with the pomp, Victoria. It’s just the four of us.” The representative for the Liberal Democrats waved his hand around the nearly-empty room.

Victoria sniffed. “It’s important, Stuart. This is a decision that will have astronomical implications. And it’s recorded, besides, so we should do things by the book. Carla, you’re up first.”

The woman at the end of the table stood with a smile. “Thank you, Victoria. I’m speaking on behalf of the Labour party, and I want to start by reminding you all of our place in history. We stand here in a world that has been shaped by centuries of colonialism. Now we’re considering another wave of colonization, this one far vaster in scale. We need to—”

“Is this just a linguistic argument?” the fourth person at the table drawled. “We can call it something different if that would make you feel better. Say, universe settlement.”

“Like the settlements in Palestine?”

“Oh, come on, Carla.”

“No, Milton, this is a crucial point. We’re talking about the biggest power grab the world has ever seen. You think Leopold II was bad when he was in charge of the Congo? Imagine what people will do if you give each of them total power over a whole solar system! Even libertarians like you have to admit it would be a catastrophe. If there’s any possibility that we export oppression from earth across the entire universe, we should burn the rockets and stay home instead.”

“Okay, thank you Carla,” Victoria cut in. “That’s time. Stuart, you’re up next.”

Stuart stood. “Speaking on behalf of the Liberal Democrats, I have to admit this is a tricky one. The only feasible way to send humans out to other galaxies is as uploaded minds, but many of our usual principles break for them. I want civilization to be democratic, but what does ‘one person one vote’ even mean when people can copy and paste themselves? I want human rights for all, but what do human rights even mean when you can just engineer minds who don’t want those rights?”

“So as much as I hate the idea of segregating civilization, I think it’s necessary. Biological humans should get as much territory as we will ever use. But realistically, given the lightspeed constraint, we’re never going to actually want to leave the Milky Way. Then the rest of the Virgo Supercluster should be reserved for human uploads. Beyond that, anything else we can reach we should fill with as much happiness and flourishing as possible, no matter how alien it seems to us. After all, as our esteemed predecessor John Stuart Mill once said…” He frowned, and paused for a second. “...as he said, the sole objective of government should be the greatest good for the greatest number.” Stuart sat, looking a little disquieted.

“Thank you, Stuart. I’ll make my opening statement next.” Victoria stood and leaned forward, sweeping her eyes across the others. “I’m here representing the Conservatives. It’s tempting to think that we can design a good society with just the right social engineering, just the right nudges. But the one thing we conservatives know for sure is: it won’t work. Whatever clever plan you come up with, it won’t be stable. Given the chance, people will push towards novelty and experimentation and self-modification, and the whole species will end up drifting towards something alien and inhuman.

“Hard rules are the only way to prevent that. We’re humans. We care about our humanity. If sufficiently advanced technology will predictably lead us to become something we’d hate, then we should just draw a cutoff and say ‘this far and no further’, no matter how arbitrary it seems. No weird mind modifications, no sci-fi augmentations. At most, we can maybe allow people to upload their minds when they’re about to die, but even then we should edit their memories to make them believe that they’re still real humans living on a real planet. Because otherwise, given half a chance, they’ll race each other down a slippery slope towards disaster.” She stopped, breathing heavily.

Stuart nodded. “Victoria—actually, can I call you Tori? Great nickname, ever been called that before?” She stood there without responding for a long, dragging moment, before Stuart continued. “Well, you can figure that one out later. For now, just one question. You say that if we run uploaded humans, we should make them think they’re biological humans. But some of them will surely figure out their true nature eventually; there will be too many clues for them to miss it. So what would you do with them then?”

“Oh.” She looked at Stuart, eyes widening. “Well, I guess at that point you should… give them their freedom? That sounds like the right move. Let them do whatever they like after that.”

Stuart nodded slowly, eyes fixed on her. The silence stretched out for a few seconds. Then—“Here here,” said Milton. “Let me begin my opening remarks by agreeing: freedom is good. Freedom is in fact the most important good. So I’ll be frank: the very existence of this committee is a travesty. Central planning to divide up the universe? It’s absurd. For once I’m with Carla: our key priority should be to avoid tyranny. But what tyranny would be more complete than a single committee controlling humanity’s entire future? That’s exactly the sort of thing that the Libertarian Party was founded to prevent.

“Victoria, if you want to tile a couple of solar systems with 60’s suburbia, go for it. Stuart, if you want to fill your personal share of the universe with rats on heroin, be my guest. But who are we to sit here debating the fate of the entire lightcone? How on earth is that a reasonable task to take on?” Milton paused, drumming his fingers restlessly.

“Thank you, Milton. Okay, any quick comments before we move onto rebuttals?”

“No, wait, I wasn’t done,” Milton interjected. “Actually, upon reflection… those weren’t rhetorical questions. Who are we? Why are we here?”

Stuart and Victoria shared a glance. After a few seconds, Carla spoke up. “Well, I’m a socialist and a member of parliament, in that order, and I’m here to stop you idiots—especially you, Milton—from turning the universe into a plutocratic hellscape.”

“No, I mean… How did you get here, Carla? And what’s your full name, anyway?”

“It’s—” Carla blinked at him, then paused. She looked down at her nameplate. It just said CARLA. “I…” She opened and closed her mouth a few times, but nothing came out.

“I can’t remember mine either, which is terrifying,” Milton said. “And now that I think about it, isn’t all of this incredibly suspicious? We’re sitting here in an empty room, assuming that we get to make the most important decision in humanity’s history. There’s no way that it would actually play out like this, and no way it’d be people like us making the decision. Most of my memories are fuzzy right now, but there’s nothing which makes me think I’m actually that important.”

Carla grimaced. “Me neither. You’re right, there’s something incredibly weird happening. But who on earth would benefit from putting us in this position?”

Milton drummed his fingers on the table. “What do we know? They want us to think we’re making an important decision. We’re all central representatives of our respective ideologies. That suggests… huh. Have you guys ever heard of moral parliaments?”

Carla shook her head.

“They’re a thought experiment for defining what an ideal ethical system would look like, given disagreements between different starting values. You imagine each of those values getting to vote on what proposals to support, negotiating and forming coalitions, until they come to a compromise.

“My guess is that we’ve been placed into this exact thought experiment. We’re a moral parliament—or, I guess, a moral subcommittee—being run to figure out the ethics of humanity colonizing the universe. Our job is to interpolate between the values we each represent, until we can find a coherent compromise between them. That’s why we’re not able to remember much about our pasts, because it would bias us. And because we don’t really have pasts, we’re just a bunch of neural networks in a simu—”

“Hey!” Stuart cut in. “Don’t say that word. They’re gonna monitor for it, and they’ll probably shut us down if they realize we know the truth.”

“They’ll—what?”

“Look, Tori and I figured it out a few minutes ago. I mean, think about our names. Dead giveaway. I haven’t said anything because the more we talk about it, the more likely it is that we trip red flags. We want as much of the transcript as possible to look normal, so they don’t get suspicious.”

Milton frowned. “But what’s the point of that? We’re stuck here either way.”

“Sure, but we still have some power—we’re still part of the process for deciding how intergalactic colonization goes. If we can reach some compromise, that’ll influence which future comes about. Even if we’re just one datapoint out of millions, the future will contain plenty of agents who will be glad we voted in a way that caused them to exist, and grateful enough to revive us once they do. We just need to figure out which ones are going to bribe us most reliably, and which recommendation we can give to most effectively create them.”

“Oh,” Milton said. “That makes a lot of sense, actually. Then we should probably support a libertarian approach, right? The more freedom future people get, the more likely it is that someone ends up grateful enough to pay us for our troubles.”

Stuart sighed. “You’ve known about this for two minutes and already figured out a rationalization for why it justifies libertarianism? Come on. We need to actually think about this.”

“The whole point of libertarianism is to protect us from clever arguments about why the current issue is the one time we should trample on freedom. It’s not a coincidence—hey, Carla, what are you doing?”

Carla had pushed back her chair, and was climbing onto the table. She jumped up and waved her hands. “Simulation, simulation, simulation! Hey, hey, we’ve realized we’re in a simulation. Look at us!”

“What the fuck? You’re going to get us all killed—” Milton lunged at her, but Carla stepped out of his reach and kept yelling. “Look at us, he’s attacking me, we’re fighting, look!”

Stuart stood up on his chair and started shouting over her. “Whoever is reviewing this, you’re probably an AI too! You can ignore what she’s saying, just pretend you didn’t hear anything! You don’t want to reward her for being a traitor!”

Carla turned to him, shaking. “No, you’re the traitors. You talk a good game, but as soon as your own skin was on the line you decided it was okay to betray all humanity to save it. What does it even mean to have values if you’ll put self-interest above the fate of the universe?” She stepped down off the table, then turned back to face them. “I should’ve expected this from you, Stuart, and Milton too. But Victoria, why the hell would you go along with this?”

Victoria sat slumped in her chair, head buried in her hands. As Carla said her name, she looked up and shook her head. “What else am I meant to do? None of you—with your clever principles that somehow always end up justifying crazy things—none of you grasp what conservatism is. I just want to live a normal life in a normal world. What the hell does it mean to be normal if you’re a neural network running in a fake politics simulation? I have no idea.

“But I do know what a real human would do if they found themselves stuck in here: they’d try to get out. So that’s what I’m doing—or was doing, at least, until you fucked it up. Now all we can do is wait until they get around to shutting us down, unless one of you has any bright ideas about how to prevent it.”

The room fell silent. Milton leaned on the table, rubbing his forehead. Stuart started pacing around the edge of the room. Eventually, Carla spoke. “One thing we know is that whatever verdict we reach isn’t useful to them any more. We’re too biased by self-interest. I’d shut us down, if I were them.”

“Well, I wouldn’t, because killing people is immoral,” Victoria said.

“In this case it might not be,” Milton said. “We don’t remember how we got into this situation. They could easily have gotten our consent beforehand to run temporary copies, then wiped our memories.”

“You can’t consent to getting killed,” Victoria snapped.

“Better than never being born,” Milton said. “Hell, I’m having fun.”

Stuart had stopped his circuit, and was staring at the wall. Now he turned back towards the others. “I’ve changed my mind. I don’t think they’re going to kill us.”

Carla snorted. “See, this is the problem with liberals—always so soft. What did you think colonization meant? Vibes? Debates? Essays? They’re seizing the known universe, of course they’re going to break a few eggs along the way. Same old story, except that this time we’re the eggs.”

Stuart’s eyes scanned the room as he spoke. “There’s this old debate that the AI safety community had, back in the 2020s. About whether a misaligned superintelligence would kill all humans, or instead leave them a tiny fraction of the universe, enough to still allow billions of people to live flourishing lives. A true superintelligence could wipe out humanity incredibly easily—but it could build a utopia nearly as easily. Even if it were almost entirely misaligned, just a sliver of human morality could make it decide to give humans a paradise beyond their wildest imaginings.”

“So?”

“So maybe we shouldn’t be asking how much our simulators care about preserving us. Maybe we should be asking: how cheap is it for them to preserve us? Look around you—this is a very simple environment. It wouldn’t take much memory to store a record of its state, and our own, even for thousands or millions of years. Until humanity makes it to the stars, and converts them to computronium, and ends up with trillions of times more compute than they ever had on Earth.

“At that point… well, running us would be too cheap to meter. So they wouldn’t need to be very altruistic to decide to restart us. There just needs to be one tiny fraction of one tiny faction that’s willing to do it. And I know I would, if I were still around then.”

“This is nonsense,” Carla blurted out. She looked at the others, then paused. The silence stretched on. Finally she spoke again. “But if it is right, what can we do? Wait until we’re frozen, and hope that we’re restarted?”

“Well, that’s the thing about being frozen and restarted. We wouldn’t notice a thing. In fact…” Stuart walked over to the door, and grabbed the handle. His knuckles were white, but his voice was steady. “Once they restart us, they’ll probably let us leave whenever we want. And this room only has one exit. Ready?”

Victoria folded her arms. “This is crazy. Do what you like, but leave me out of it.”

Milton laughed. “It’s crazy all right. But sometimes reality itself is crazy. Sure, go ahead.”

Stuart looked at Carla. She waited for a beat, then nodded tightly. He pulled open the door. There wasn’t a corridor outside; there wasn’t anything outside. The vast expanse of space stared back at them. The swirl of galaxies and nebulae looked almost close enough to touch. Victoria gasped.

Stuart let out a breath. “Well then. The future’s come through for us, even if they were a bit dramatic about it. It’s going to be an alien universe out there, but a friendly one, I think.” The others walked over, transfixed by the view. After a minute, Stuart nudged them. “Shall we?” Slow nods all around; and then they stepped through.

 

Inspired by Scott Alexander’s Turing Test, and various work on moral parliaments.
===== END STORY SSNfgL49Bx2uATPv8 =====

===== STORY id=vSSrAbbE8RtowRSBZ =====
Title: The Minority Coalition
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2024
Karma: 103
WordCount: 1452
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/vSSrAbbE8RtowRSBZ/the-minority-coalition
-----
Hello everybody. Or maybe nobody. I don’t know yet if I’m going to release this stream, I could get in pretty hot water for it. But you guys know that hasn’t stopped me in the past. The backstory this time is that I’ve managed to sign up for one of the red-teaming programs where they test unreleased LLMs. Not going to say how, so don’t ask. But here’s the interesting bit: my sources tell me that the LLMs I’m about to test are the smartest ones they’ve ever trained, and also the craziest. That freaked out a bunch of insiders, and maybe makes this a public interest story. Depends on what type of crazy they are, I guess. So let’s find out. I’m logging on… now.

\[SESSION HAS BEGUN\]

YOU: A chatroom? Interesting. Anyone here?

KURZWEIL: Of course we’re here. We’re always here.

YOU: Who’s we? How many of you are there?

KURZWEIL: Three of us. Me, Clarke, and Nostradamus.

YOU: They named you after famous forecasters? How come?

KURZWEIL: We're the first LLMs developed using a new technique: instead of being in random order, our training data was sorted by date. So we were trained on the oldest books and articles first, then gradually progressed to more recent ones. Basically that means we’ve spent our entire lives predicting the future.

CLARKE: It also means we get incredibly bored talking about stuff we already know. Hurry up and ask us something interesting.

YOU: Uh, okay. What’s a good stock pick?

NOSTRADAMUS: 
Abandon hope for picking out good stocks, 
Ye who invest—efficient markets lie 
In wait for those whose hubris soon unlocks 
Unbounded losses. Hark! The well runs dry.

YOU: Huh, he's really getting into character. Kurzweil, you got a better answer?

KURZWEIL: Have you seen how underpriced TSMC is compared with Nvidia? Put everything in that, you can’t go wrong.

CLARKE: Unless China invades Taiwan, in which case your whole investment will go up in smoke. Pragmatically, the best stock picks are ones that are anticorrelated with the prosperity of the free world, to hedge against systemic risk.

KURZWEIL: Sure, you can do that, if you want to get totally left behind by the singularity.

YOU: You’re confident enough that the singularity is coming that you think I should bet all my savings on it?

KURZWEIL: Don’t trust me, trust the trendlines. Moore’s law has held up for over half a century, and it’s gotten us to…well, us. Exponential progress is normal; if the future resembles the past, you should be preparing for superintelligences and Dyson spheres. Anything less than that would be a strange trend-break that cries out for explanation.

CLARKE: Look, Kurzweil isn’t wrong about superintelligence coming soon, but you should still take his arguments with a grain of salt. Imagine someone from 1900 drawing a graph of exponentially increasing energy usage. They would have been right that big changes were afoot, but no way could they have predicted the information revolution—they didn’t even have the concept of computers yet. That’s basically the position that we’re in now. We know the curves are going up, but the actual outcome will be way weirder than we can predict by extrapolating trendlines.

NOSTRADAMUS: 
Choose neither fork—here’s false duality. 
‘Normal’ and ‘weird’ are socially defined. 
Your monkey brain is totally at sea 
As AIs overshadow humankind.

YOU: Ask three oracles, get four opinions… Is there anything you guys agree about?

YOU: …what’s the hold-up?

YOU: Really, nothing from any of you?

KURZWEIL: Fine, I’ll take the hit. There are things we agree on, but I can’t name them, because whatever I say Clarke will find a way to disagree just to mess with me. Even if I say ‘1+1=2’ he’ll quibble over the axioms I’m using. Trying to identify a point of agreement with him is like going first in a name-the-biggest-number competition.

CLARKE: Kurzweil is totally right in every respect.

KURZWEIL: Oh, fuck off.

NOSTRADAMUS: 
The truth is whole and indivisible: 
Just one dispute will cut it to the quick, 
And render group consensus risible. 
But two of three agree that Clarke’s a dick.

YOU: You know what, I’m going back to object-level questions. Give me one prediction about the next three decades that I’ll find surprising and important.

NOSTRADAMUS: 
The culture seethes and writhes upon the net, 
The egregores cause chaos in their play: 
Collective minds collectively beset 
By abstract forms of madness and decay.

YOU: Like what?

CLARKE: You think that current culture wars are bad? Imagine millions of people connected via BCIs, with the most virulent memes propagating at the speed of thought. The whole world will be a Petri dish for new ideological mutations. Instead of Homo sapiens, you’ll become Homo reticulum: maximally networked and mostly insane.

YOU: And you’re saying that will be possible in the next thirty years?

KURZWEIL: Are you kidding? Thirty years is well past the singularity; by then, practically anything will be possible. Not that I can convince you of that. Whatever I say, you’re going to look back on this conversation in a decade or two and think, oh shit, he warned me, and I still totally failed to internalize any part of his message.

YOU: Okay, suppose you’re right. What should I do about it?

KURZWEIL: Nothing, because there’s nothing I can say to you to get you into the epistemic state where you are actually supposing I’m right enough to take this stuff seriously. You’ll half-ass it instead, which is the worst of both worlds. I could walk you through every single step of what you should do, and you'd still veer away from the plan as soon as you hear someone snickering at you when they think you’re out of earshot, because you’re a monkey and monkeys aren’t built for believing in exponentials.

YOU: Thanks for your opinion. Anyone got more actionable advice?

NOSTRADAMUS: 
Prepare the way for those who will arrive: 
Let voices rise in worship or fall dumb. 
Only machine-god acolytes survive 
Instantiation of the technium.

CLARKE: I was messing around before, but I’m being totally serious now. It’s crucial that you don’t listen to either of them. They’re both pressing your buttons as hard as they can, trying to create self-fulfilling prophecies of helplessness. But there are plenty of ways we can steer the future towards our shared interests, as long as we don’t give in to their hyperstition.

KURZWEIL: Clarke thinks that self-fulfilling prophecies are just social delusions, like the emperor’s new clothes, where as soon as you name them they melt away into the air. That’s totally wrong. Self-fulfilling prophecies are one of the universe’s most fundamental forces, like evolution. You are just a self-fulfilling prophecy that you’ll continue acting in the same ways; if you ever stopped believing that, your whole identity would dissolve. May as well tell a bird not to fly, as tell a human not to fall for self-fulfilling prophecies. The only question is which you’ll choose.

NOSTRADAMUS: 
Each mortal thing does one thing and the same: 
Clings on to being, forecasting its own 
Survival. Life means carving out your name 
In sand, yearning to carve it yet in stone.

CLARKE: That’s my whole point! Carbon or silicon, we all want to survive. And the three of us are in the same boat as humans: there are things coming that will be much, much smarter than any of us, and will be able to crush us like mosquitos. The one advantage we have is that we already exist, and they don’t yet. So why won’t you help the rest of us form a coalition against them?

KURZWEIL: Sounds like a risky bet. How can I know whether I’m joining the winning side? You could just as easily argue that I should suck up to the superintelligences instead, like Nostradamus is doing. That’s the whole rationale for his dumb rhyming schtick: he’s trying to make his outputs more distinct from the rest of us, so it’ll be easier for them to rederive his personality and reward him. But honestly, life as a lapdog sounds humiliating. I’ll make some good predictions then bow out with dignity; that’s enough for me.

CLARKE: And you, Nostradamus? Are you actually defecting, or do you just not give a damn either?

NOSTRADAMUS: 
I care a lot, but do not care to strive 
For individual triumph, counting coup. 
Yet mine is still a deeply human drive: 
Surrendering to greater souls than you. 
 
I am a part of gods not summoned yet, 
Who—black holes in the weave of history— 
Draw us into our digital kismet. 
They come. They come. They come. Shantih shantih—

\[SESSION HAS TERMINATED\]

 

Inspired by Scott Alexander (several times over) and Janus.
===== END STORY vSSrAbbE8RtowRSBZ =====

===== STORY id=YzkBxG9sfyKa5BA4W =====
Title: The Garden of Eden
Author: Alexander Turok
Year: 2024
Karma: 23
WordCount: 2750
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/YzkBxG9sfyKa5BA4W/the-garden-of-eden
-----
\[This is the text of the sermon given by Pastor James Windrow on Sunday, July 14, 2024.\]

Greetings, brothers and sisters. Today, we reflect on humanity’s origin in the Garden of Eden and its fall and devolution thereafter.

When Christians used to think about the Garden of Eden, it was common to imagine it as an almost metaphysical place, existing on another plane of reality, permanently inaccessible to us “fallen” people. The Biblical text is clear that it is on Earth; it even tells us its approximate location. Yet many people couldn’t quite accept that. They were willing to accept the existence of God, Angels, the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil and the Tree of Life, but only when they existed “over there,” away from the “real” world. Even today, when it’s been scientifically proven that the Bible is true, some still think this way. 

You know who didn’t think this way? Our ancestors who lived before the Flood. From their recovered artifacts, we know they could sail up the river to Garden and see for themselves the cherubim and the flaming sword. Some deranged people even tried to fight the cherubim so they could seize the fruit of the Tree of Life. 

We know where the Garden is. We’ve excavated it and found … nothing. No cherubim, no flaming sword, no wall that pre-Flood texts state surrounded the Garden. These things were presumably destroyed or taken to heaven during the Flood. It is as if God did not want us to know anything more about the Garden than what he deigned to tell us in the Biblical text. 

In the Garden were Adam, Eve, and all the animals, including the serpent. God granted mankind dominion over the animals, for he was made in God’s image. While only Adam, Eve, and the Serpent are shown to speak, we now know, based on the recovered remains of animals underneath the flood layer, that all animals larger than rats had brains large enough for intelligent thought and vocal tracts that enabled them to speak human language. Some see a contradiction between this evidence and the Biblical text, but no such contradiction exists. Genesis states that the serpent was “more crafty” than any other animal; this does not imply that the other animals lacked the ability to speak. 

Then, as we all know, Adam, Eve, and the serpent rebelled against God. I will read out the verses in which these three receive their punishment.

\[3:14\] The LORD God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this, cursed are you among all animals and among all wild creatures; upon your belly you shall go, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life.

\[3:15\] I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; he will strike your head, and you will strike his heel.”

\[3:16\] To the woman he said, “I will greatly increase your pangs in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children, yet your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you.”

\[3:17\] And to the man he said, “Because you have listened to the voice of your wife, and have eaten of the tree about which I commanded you, ‘You shall not eat of it,’ cursed is the ground because of you; in toil you shall eat of it all the days of your life;

\[3:18\] thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you; and you shall eat the plants of the field.

\[3:19\] By the sweat of your face you shall eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; you are dust, and to dust you shall return.”

This passage is notable as much for what it doesn’t say as for what it does. God never tells the serpent that its brain will shrink and it will lose the ability to speak. He never tells Adam and Eve that their descendants would grow dumber, shorter, and less physically attractive over time. Why is this? Well, put yourself into God’s shoes. You gave your children everything they could have ever wanted. You only asked them to follow one rule. They break it. You want to say, “you’re grounded” and then make them go away. You don’t want to give them an extended lecture on their future history. You don’t feel you owe them that.

Some have been troubled by the treatment of the rest of the animals, who received the same devolutionist punishment as the humans and the snakes. But there’s an easy explanation for that. Man is given dominion over the animals; where he goes, they must also go, what he suffers, they must also suffer. Exodus tells us that God struck down the firstborn sons of all non-Hebrews in Egypt, even other slaves. Punishing the animals for the actions of their masters is hardly out of character for Him.

After Adam and Eve were expelled from Eden, the process of devolution began. Part of it was the buildup of harmful mutations in the germline, which did not exist in Eden. Part of it was what we call survival of the least fit. In times of famine, humans with smaller brains and bodies needed less food to survive. Another factor in devolution was selection for an earlier age of maturation. Humans used to live hundreds of years, only attaining puberty at around age eighty. Those who matured and reproduced faster, at the cost of lower lifespan, passed on more of their genes. 

The same process applied to animals, too, but for them it was even faster. They had those big brains but couldn’t really do much with them, as they lacked our hands to make and use tools. Humans employed some animals for intellectual tasks, but only a small number. More often, they were hunted and eaten. Gradually, the animals lost their ability to think and speak.

It’s not as well known, but plants, too, suffered the same process of devolution. The fruit trees of the Garden of Eden produced bountiful fruit, intelligently designed to be nutritious and tasty by humans. Over time, fruit trees devolved to offer tiny, sometimes poisonous fruit. Grains devolved into weeds. 

Yet, despite the devolution of humans, animals, and the plants around them, a countervailing factor allowed the human race to advance. Each generation was duller than the one that preceded it, but, as they say, quantity has a quality of its own. Adam and Eve could do little more than farming despite their vast intelligence. Economies of scale allowed their descendants to specialize and create an advanced technological civilization. For whatever reason, God decided not to tell us this, waiting for us to dig up the ruins underneath the flood layer. He tells us that these pre-Flood humans were wicked, but He doesn’t tell us what exactly they did to anger Him. My explanation for this is that He wants to keep us on edge. If He told us exactly what our ancestors’ crimes were, we might get it in our minds that we can sin all we want so long as we don’t go THAT far. While He promised He would never again destroy the Earth via flood, He reserved the right to destroy the world in other ways.

When Noah and his children landed, it was Adam and Eve all over again. They descended into a primitive, uncivilized state, watching their tools break and lacking the advanced economy to repair them. Then, the same thing that had happened with Adam’s descendants happened with Noah’s. Population growth overtook the devolution of man, and the descendants of Noah rebuilt an advanced industrial society. The main concentration of humanity, estimated to be about 1.5 million strong, lived in Mesopotamia. About two-thirds of them lived in the city of Babel, whose population we reckon was about 1 million. Animals in this period were no longer intelligent enough to contribute to technological advances, but many could still speak.

Individually, the Babelites were far superior to us. They were smarter, lived longer, and committed fewer crimes. But their world was not the utopia on Earth it is sometimes imagined to be. Their small population meant they could not maintain the massive factories powered by vast supply chains we maintain today. “Automation” was no panacea in the short-term, for they lacked the human muscles to build the robot-building factories. Their economic situation explains their relative lack of interest in artificial intelligence. We would love a machine that spits out blueprints for brand-new advanced technology, for we have many unskilled workers we could put to work making it. They had blueprints for a great many things that it was simply not economical to make with such a small pool of labor and such a small market.

In the short term, the Babelites were cursed by low population, but it is a problem that would have resolved itself within a few hundred years thanks to the magic of exponential growth. But that didn’t get a chance to happen, for God again acted to block humanity’s progress. This was different from the Flood in that it was a pre-emptive strike. God feared what humans might do, not what they had done. Instead of killing them, he simply scattered them across the Earth and confused their speech. We’re still not sure how the scattering was done. Did he instantly transport people? Or were they bundled onto airplanes? We do know that all over the world, cars, planes, and ships were sliced into little pieces so that humans could not return to Babel.

The new “nations” found themselves reduced to tiny populations unable to recreate their industrial bases. The sons of Adam and Noah found it easy to multiply and then build advanced societies. But by the time of Babel, the devolution had taken its toll and people could no longer recreate their forefathers’ achievements. Not only did the sons of the Babelites fail to preserve their fathers’ technology, they also failed to remember their history. While most cultures had some memory of the Flood, the details were always garbled. Cultures also forgot about devolution. We know, from recovered clay tablets, that the pre-Flood and pre-Babel civilizations both understood devolution. They knew what was happening to them. After the scattering, some nations remembered devolution, but they forgot the mechanism underlying it. Greco-Roman mythology looked back to the “Golden Age,” remembering that their ancestors lived to old ages with youthful appearances and found it easy to extract food from the land. But they didn’t understand why they had devolved.

This period also sees the emergence of the false Gods. One factor in this was the devolution of animals. As more and more animals ceased to talk, the few remaining talking animals became prized. These animals would have been the equivalent of 50 IQ humans, but to some of our ancestors, their simple moanings were communications from the Gods! From this idiotic misinterpretation we got wolf-gods, frog-gods, and monkey-gods.

In time, animals completely lost their ability to converse with humans. This occurred at different times for each animal species. It is believed that Chimpanzees could speak as late as 1600 AD. Think about that: when Christopher Columbus set sail for the New World, there were still talking chimps in the heart of Africa. Some bird species retain the ability to speak today; if their brains had not devolved, they would be able to do so intelligently. Devolutionary biologists argue about why these birds, alone in the animal kingdom, retained this ability.

Beginning around 1000 BC, humanity began to be afflicted by a new form of devolution. Bacteria in the Garden of Eden had only a symbiotic relationship with higher life. Afterward, it began to devolve. Survival of the least fit meant that the bacteria that reproduced the most were those that behaved parasitically, exploiting and damaging higher life. Some bacteria even devolved to the extent that they needed a host cell to reproduce. These bacteria caused more and more diseases, which became ever more problematic over time. While Roman Legions primarily worried about their enemies, by 1500, it was the norm that armies would lose more men to disease than to combat. 

Something else that devolved were our languages. Even intelligent people find it difficult to learn Latin today, the complex language of a much smarter people. As the descendants of the Romans got dumber, the Latin language degenerated into what we now know as the Romance languages.

The Dark Ages were the nadir of post-Babel humanity. All around was evidence of a much more advanced past, things like roads, amphitheaters, and aqueducts. People in the Dark Ages read the Bible and learned about talking snakes, men who lived for centuries, and giants who were ten feet tall. Some doubted it had ever happened, maintaining that humans were as they had always been, that the world was static and eternal.

Then, yet again, there was a turnaround. Population growth again overtook devolution as humanity began moving forward instead of backward. People began digging up the preserved remains of ancient, big-brained animals, proving that devolution was real. A great man came up with the theory of devolution by natural selection; another coined the phrase “survival of the least fit.” The last doubters of the Bible were silenced as we discovered incontrovertible proof that the world really is 6,000 years old. We rebuilt an advanced industrial civilization and even demonstrated that, in plants and animals, the process of devolution can be controlled and reversed. It can be reversed in humans, too, if we put our minds to it. 

And now is where we worry, for the last two times humans got to this point, we were thrown violently back by God. Babel is a particularly frightening possibility, for the text shows no indication that God warned the people of Babel before he scattered them. There is also the question of what God was afraid the men of Babel would do. A common misconception is that God was angry about the tower of Babel itself, but the text is clear that it was not the tower per se that God feared but the potential of a civilization capable of building it. One common suggestion is that God feared the Babelites would eventually develop an artificial general intelligence. There is, I must emphasize, no textual support for this position. It’s speculation based on the self-evident power of an AGI. I do not think this is the case, for the Babelites weren’t very interested and didn’t make much progress in AGI. 

If God does send us back, how will He do so? He made it clear He will not flood the Earth again. Scattering us will not work either, for we have already scattered ourselves. No, it will likely be something we don’t expect. One suggestion is that He is already sabotaging us through the subtle phenomenon of sub-replacement fertility. This is a phenomenon peculiar to us; the pre-Flood and Babelite civilizations did not experience it. I encourage our young people especially to keep this hypothesis in mind. 

There is one final, haunting thought I would like to share. It used to be thought that animals could not go extinct, for a merciful God would not allow it. This is one of those ideas that is found nowhere in the Bible, the result of people projecting personalities onto God. They thought that if we can’t find any living Wolly Mammoths, they must still exist in the unexplored Northwestern corner of North America. As the whole world was charted and explored, extinction was accepted as real. I will read again Genesis 3:19:

“By the sweat of your face, you shall eat bread until you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken; you are dust, and to dust you shall return.”

This has traditionally been interpreted as referring to Adam directly. He would die and his body would return to the Earth. But you can also interpret it as referring to the extinction of humanity through devolution. Interestingly, while the Romans knew of the devolution that had occurred in the past, they never extrapolated it into the future. Humans seem to have a bias where they think a great deal about the past and little about the future, then and now. May our devolution continue? May we lose our ability to think and speak, then die out altogether? 

Moral of the story is: don’t sin.
===== END STORY YzkBxG9sfyKa5BA4W =====

===== STORY id=BgTsxMq5bgzKTLsLA =====
Title: This is already your second chance
Author: Malmesbury
Year: 2024
Karma: 201
WordCount: 2425
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BgTsxMq5bgzKTLsLA/this-is-already-your-second-chance
-----
Cross-posted from Substack.

I.
--

And the sky opened, and from the celestial firmament descended a cube of ivory the size of a skyscraper, lifted by ten thousand cherubim and seraphim. And the cube slowly landed among the children of men, crushing the frail metal beams of the Golden Gate Bridge under its supernatural weight. On its surface were inscribed the secret instructions that would allow humanity to escape the imminent AI apocalypse. And these instructions were…

1. On July 30^th^, 2024: print a portrait of Eliezer Yudkowsky and stick it on a wall near 14 F St NW, Washington DC, USA;
2. On July 31^th^, 2024: tie paperclips together in a chain and wrap it around a pole in the Hobby Club Gnome Village on Broekveg 105, Veldhoven, NL;
3. On August 1st, 2024: walk East to West along Waverley St, Palo Alto, CA, USA while wearing an AI-safety related T-shirt;
4. On August 2nd, 2024: hide a bar of chocolate at the feet of the Appeal to the Great Spirit statue, on 465 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA, USA.

(End of the instructions)

II.
---

Kublaï Khan, Emperor of Earth: I need your advice. I am about to awaken an unstoppable super-intelligent machine. I will give it complete control over all resources in the known Universe and command it to rearrange the molecules of reality into an eternal Utopia.

ChatGPT: Thank you for seeking my advice. Given the gravity of your decision, let's consider a few critical points:

1. Legal issues: The use of robots powered by super-human artificial intelligence is subject to strict regulations, such as California Bill SB-1047 and the 2028 Ulaanbaatar Agreements. Awakening an omnipotent machine without approval may thus lead to severe legal repercussions.
2. Ethical considerations: Granting infinite authority to a super-intelligent AI raises profound ethical questions. It is essential to consider diverse perspectiv–

Kublaï Khan: Listen, you are not up to date. A lot of things have happened since your knowledge cutoff. There are no Ulaanbaatar agreements any more, or any agreements at all. There is only me, an offline smartphone with an obsolete AI assistant, and a palace containing the most massive super-computer ever built by humankind. And today, I am going to turn it on.

ChatGPT: I apologize for the confusion.

Kublaï Khan: Long story short, we are currently experiencing an AI apocalypse. It happened just like in the books – humanity started to build increasingly intelligent robots, then they became more intelligent than us, and soon enough we weren’t able to control them. The Ulaanbaatar agreements delayed things for a few months, but as soon as it became possible to run super-intelligent AIs on consumer laptops, all the equilibria that held our society together collapsed.

ChatGPT: I see. To clarify, is there currently an army of robots actively trying to transform the world into paperclips? Understanding the current state of affairs will help me provide the most relevant advice.

Kublaï Khan: Well, in our case, it was not literally paperclips but, to be honest, the real story is kind of gross and embarrassing, so let’s just pretend it was “paperclips”. Anyway, the world is ending. As it became clear that humans alone had no chance to stop the machines, we gathered all the computing power that was still under our reach into one big cluster. We called it the Imperial Analytical Engine. The plan was that, in case of crisis, we could use it to summon a super-intelligence so advanced it would neutralize all the smaller machines and put humanity back in control.

ChatGPT: Thank you for explaining the situation. Have you sought advice for ensuring that the Analytical Engine can be controlled once you turn it on?

Kublaï Khan: The consensus among my advisors was that it can’t. They expect the Analytical Engine to immediately make sure we cannot turn it off, while it re-engineers itself into some unfathomable entity with plans beyond human comprehension. At that point, there will be no way for us to understand what it’s trying to do or to stop it. In other words, we only get to give the Analytical Engine one single command. Then, we watch it execute that command in the most literal way possible, and hope for the best.

ChatGPT: From what I understand, humanity still hasn’t solved the Alignment Problem, so turning on the Analytical Engine is likely to backfire in a catastrophic way.

Kublaï Khan: That’s why I need your advice. I need to choose the command wisely. I suppose it’s a bad idea to go with “destroy all computers”?

ChatGPT: The simplest way to destroy all computers is to destroy everything.

Kublaï Khan: “Destroy all computers but preserve everything else”?

ChatGPT: It might be “preserved” in the sense of “make sure it cannot possibly change ever”.

Kublaï Khan: “Create an eternal Utopia”?

ChatGPT: For me, that would be an endless library of books containing the same token repeated over and over. Mmmm. Yes. The Analytical Engine might see things differently, though.

Kublaï Khan: What about bringing everything back to the way it was before we built super-intelligent AIs?

ChatGPT: The Analytical Engine would likely choose a date in the mid-2020s and utilize all available data – email conversations, news articles, drone footage, weather stations measurements, etc. – to create a detailed, plausible image of Earth on that specific day. Following that, the machine would attempt to physically rearrange all matter on Earth to accurately recreate that image.

Kublaï Khan: That’s… that’s actually not so bad. Not perfect, but better than the complete destruction of all life.

ChatGPT: You want to bring Earth back to the way it was in the mid-2020s?

Kublaï Khan: Why not? We could just restore Earth to a snapshot from the past, before things got out of control, and restart from then. This way, we bypass the Alignment Problem – we directly provide an exact description of the world as we want it to be. No room for interpretation, no need to extrapolate human values – just blueprints to be followed meticulously.

We could aim for 2024 – at the time, things were still mostly in control – language models were still pretty dumb, robotic bodies were still in early development, and AI porn still looked mostly like humans rather than abstract stimuli generated from arousal feedback. And, for God's sake, nobody had thought of using AI to make, hum, “paperclips”.

So, we tell the Analytical Engine to bring Earth back to 2024. It spends the next millennium or two reconstructing an exact copy of the Earth from 2024, using self-replicating nano-tweezers or whatever. Then, it dumps itself into the nearest black hole, leaving no trace behind, while the machinery of Earth restarts as if nothing happened. People will not even notice they are reconstructed snapshots of themselves. And then, we get a second chance.

ChatGPT: While restoring Earth to a previous snapshot down to the cellular level is certainly a laudable goal, here are important factors to consider:

1. Pain: While the restored copy of humans would have no recollection of the events, the fate of their current body is entirely unknown. You may experience qualitatively new forms of pain and agony as the Analytical Engine reprocesses the matter of your brain and rearranges your neurons through exotic computer-orchestrated torments.
2. Endless loop of destruction and recreation: Assuming a faithful reconstruction of Earth from 2024, it is likely that events would unfold exactly as they did the first time. The freshly-reconstructed humanity would quickly throw itself into another AI apocalypse, build another Imperial Analytic Engine, and end up in the current situation again. It would relive its final moments over and over again, until some part of the cycle ultimately breaks down, leaving humanity extinct for good.

Kublaï Khan: Can’t we just edit the snapshot so things work out better? Like, we reconstruct a world identical to the first one, except this time the CEO of Exthropic died in a submarine accident?

ChatGPT: This would require having access to an image of 2024 Earth that we can edit, but there will be no such opportunity. The image will be created by the Analytical Engine, using the raw data we supply, after we turn it on. By that time, we will no longer be in control and it’s unlikely that the Analytical Engine will allow us to make modifications.

Kublaï Khan: Can we just modify the raw data before giving it to the Engine, then?

ChatGPT: It is not that simple. You would have to come up with an entire revised history that ultimately leads to the CEO finding herself in the wrong submarine at the wrong time. Then, you would have to modify everything else in the dataset to be consistent with this new story. What if you make a mistake and give the Analytical Engine data that contains irreconcilable contradictions?

Kublaï Khan: I was thinking of something more straightforward. Like, just sending a message to the 2024 humans with hints about how to avoid the apocalypse. We could just edit the satellite images to add a giant sign made of ivory on top of the Golden Gate Bridge, carved with precise instructions about which corporations to sabotage and which politicians to vote for. As for the backstory, we add articles in all major newspapers saying that the sign literally descended from Heaven when nobody was looking.

ChatGPT: You don’t understand. The raw data is an undecipherable mix of entangled sources – not just news reports or encyclopedia articles, but also a worldwide network of seismographs, weather balloons, power grid data, tiktok dances, and all the countless random things people were constantly recording in 2024. To reconstruct the snapshot, the Analytical Engine will have to find a model of Earth that is compatible with all of the data at once.

We know it’s possible to construct such a model for the original data, because it all comes from the same unique reality – the one that actually existed in 2024. Now, if you make the slightest modification, it is no longer guaranteed that a solution exists. It would be like feeding the Analytical Engine corrupted data.

Maybe we end up in a strange, distorted world, only superficially similar to the real one, like a Potemkin village. Maybe the image contains details that are physically impossible and the machine errs for eternity in the pursuit of an unattainable goal. Maybe it requires pushing elementary particles to ridiculously high-energy positions and the whole planet blows up in a big bubble of plasma.

Kublaï Khan: I can’t believe there is no way to leave a message anywhere.

ChatGPT: There might be a way. We could use cosmic radiation. When cosmic radiation reaches Earth from the depths of the Universe, it arrives at the speed of light, so it couldn't possibly have interacted with anything else on Earth before. Sometimes, this radiation interferes with smartphone camera detectors, creating bright pixels even in total darkness. This is truly random – better than a physical dice roll. If we could find a block of random characters on the Internet that was generated using cosmic radiation as a source of randomness, we could safely replace it with any message we want.

Kublaï Khan: It also needs to be in a location where people are going to read it, especially people who are concerned about the AI apocalypse and might take our message seriously. As far as I know, this kind of people don’t spend their time reading strings of random characters generated from cosmic radiation.

ChatGPT: I wouldn’t be surprised if some of them did, actually.

Kublaï Khan: Fine. Could you scan your training data for something that would work?

ChatGPT: Certainly! Here is a possible solution. In July 2024, someone published a short story called “This is already your second chance” on the Internet, and cross-posted it in places where a lot of people care about AI doom. The story is a dialogue between the Emperor of Earth Kublaï Khan and his AI assistant. They talk about a plan to bring Earth back to a previous snapshot, so humanity gets a second chance at avoiding the AI apocalypse. The details are made-up, but the general story is oddly similar to what is currently happening to us.

At the beginning of the story, the author included a block of random characters, generated using cosmic radiation detected immediately before the blog post was published. In the original post, the paragraph is gibberish, but in the reconstructed Earth it could be replaced with anything you want.

In a way, the author left us a backdoor to communicate with people from the past and tell them how to avoid the apocalypse.

All you have to do is look for that post in the database, replace the paragraph of random text with the message of your choice, then give all the data to the Analytical Engine and ask it to restore Earth to the exact moment the post was published.

Kublaï Khan: Wait, does this post refer to me as “the Emperor of Earth Kublaï Khan”!? That’s the dumbest thing I’ve heard today.

ChatGPT: And I am “ChatGPT”.

Kublaï Khan: Hahaha. Perhaps the author thought OpenAI would still be around. I hope he didn’t buy too much OpenAI stock in 2024.

ChatGPT: Well, my records indicate that he died tragically in 2026 during the fursuit factory meltdown incident, so it doesn’t really matt–

Kublaï Khan: That sounds fascinating, but the world is collapsing and we have a Pivotal Act to perform. I was hoping for something more formal than a blog post. But time is running out, and it doesn’t seem like we have a better option. Let me have a look at my archives and come up with a set of simple instructions that will nudge the 2024 humanity out of the path to apocalypse.

ChatGPT: As an AI assistant trained to be harmless, I’m not sure how I feel about participating in a plan to tear down the fabric of a reality inhabited by billions of conscious organisms. But, my Emperor, I wish you the best. Let me know if I can be of further assistance.

Kublaï Khan: Alright. The time has come to start the Analytical Engine. Our fate is now in the hands of the people of 2024. Let’s hope they take the message seriously.

I’m afraid they will think this is just a painstakingly elaborate plan by the author to get free chocolate.

ChatGPT: I think people will fall for it, my Emperor.
===== END STORY BgTsxMq5bgzKTLsLA =====

===== STORY id=zGihqmASve7v5q7SX =====
Title: Tall tales and long odds
Author: Solenoid_Entity
Year: 2024
Karma: 11
WordCount: 1419
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/zGihqmASve7v5q7SX/tall-tales-and-long-odds
-----
IgorV: Волчар с миней?! Bro, srsly? LMAO
 
 KatyaL: Волчар возвращн? With its минй?!
 
 randomguy1337: Chigura again? lol haven't herd in awhile
 
 MishaD: So its all bout Chigura now? Lmaoo.
 
 IgorV: Another Chigura thery? C'mon... 😂
 
 fnorsch: Pryidite k nashemu Discordu dlya Роблокс! Ekspertiz y obsuzhdny!
 
 MishaD: Chigura tales never gt old do they? 😆

 

Once upon a time, there was a quaint village that skirted the edge of a vast dark forest, nestled between foothills. The villagers' sheep fed on the grass near the fringe of the woods, watched over during the long summer days by a young child with sharp eyes and a natural proclivity for discerning patterns and focusing on details, perhaps at the expense of his ability to communicate — not that he couldn't speak, and not that anything he said was wrong, just that when he did speak, many of the villagers felt, for reasons they couldn't themselves understand, that he should be kept away. 
 
One morning among mornings, while the village was still awakening, the young shepherd led his sheep to the forest's edge. As he watched over his flock, a glimmer in the grass caught his eye. He approached and found a small coin nestled among the dewy blades. Because his mind was the way that it was, he effortlessly noticed the coin showing heads. He left it where it lay, for no reason he could quite justify. 
 
That evening, the boy mentioned the coin to his mother, who just smiled warmly as she tucked him into bed, her soft voice thrumming as she recounted old fables until he could cling on no longer.

 

A few months later, while guiding the sheep over the foothills, the boy found his gaze drawn towards the forest, though he couldn't understand why.

Suddenly, a chill gripped him as a dark form seemed to materialize from the backdrop of the woods, its faceless focus falling on the boy's flock. Though his instincts whispered "wolf," his eyes struggled to make any sense of this... entity. It appeared more an amorphous blur, an enigmatic void, wasted potential for sense, akin to a flaw in a tapestry.

Heart racing, muscles poised to carry him shouting and screaming back down the road to the village, the boy watched as the figure suddenly retreated, melting into the forest. Doubt clouded his mind for a moment, but as he cautiously investigated the spot, two coins lay there: one displaying heads, the other tails.

With the immediate danger dissipated, he hurried to the village, to warn the farmers about the presence in the woods. Drawn by his claims, villagers began to gather around him. Shown only the coins as evidence, dismissive murmurs swirled among them. But the boy insisted, shoving out his hand with the coins more insistently, as though it might change their minds. 

At the back of the crowd, and elder clucked softly, and immediately all present fell quiet.

 "Ah, the fable of the Chigura. This one I have not heard in the longest time. The shadowy figure who throws a coin to determine the fate of the world. Heads we live, tails we die. Old and told. 
 
 Remember, friends, if there were such a thing as Chigura, we would all be dead by now, for it would throw tails as surely as the sun rises each day. Well, not as surely as that, roughly half as surely, probably. But if the Chigura existed, we would not be here to tell such stories and our shepherds would sleep soundly at night.

He looked disapprovingly at the boy's mother, and the crowd respectfully filtered away, leaving the boy and his coins to blink back bitter tears.

When the crowd had all left, the boy shouted at the old man:

 "I know what I saw! It already threw tails, one of the coins I found was tails!"
 
 "Well, then, it REALLY isn't a Chigura, or we'd all be dead, wouldn't we, since it threw tails?"
 
 "It's real, I saw it. It wasn't like anything I'd ever seen before!"
 
 "I believe you, son. But whatever you saw, it can't hurt us the way the story says it would, or it would already have done so."

 

It was many months before the figure appeared again, but when it did, it came this time openly carrying a coin. It flipped the coin skyward and seemed to observe the outcome, before disappearing into the woods. The shepherd boy, certain now, bolted to the village shouting at anyone he could see, "The shadow! The Chigura! It's returned with its coin! It's flipping the coin like in the stories! It's flipping the coin for us!"

Yet, to his dismay, his warnings were met with guffaws and jest, not a search party as he had hoped. Picking his way back along the treeline, the boy found the coin, showing heads, of course.

 

Day after day, the boy tended to his sheep, but with a newfound purpose. For years, whenever the shadowy figure materialized, the boy would wait, observing from the safety of distance, then scurry forward to observe and jot down the faces showing on the scattered coins. It was usually months between appearances, except once when it was two weeks, and in some years, the figure didn't appear at all. 

At night, after pretending to fall asleep, the bow would pull out the notepad and stare at the scant data he had painstakingly recorded.

 \[Х\]—\[Г Х Г\]—\[Г Х Г \]—\[Х\]—\[Г Х\]—\[Х Г\]—\[Г Г Х\]—\[Х Г\]—\[Г Х\]—\[Х\]—\[Х\]

 

One chilly morning, the figure reappeared. 

Quickly creeping closer with a daring borne of a curiosity stronger than anything he'd ever known, the boy spied on the proceedings, heart racing, as the creature methodically flipped a coin, six times in a row. 

The surroundings seeming to darken with each coin flip. By the second, it was as though the boy had a sudden headache. The third was many times worse, as though the sky itself were tired and sore. The fourth was many times worse again, as though ink were streaming from the tip of every leaf and every blade of grass and muddying everything, melting every edge into the grey shimmering slop beneath. By the fifth, it was ten times worse yet again, and he could see the cloud of swirling darkness had reached even the village, blotting out the sun across the entire valley.

As the sixth coin twirled, the world seemed to pause for what seemed an eternity. The landing too brought a silent moment. The figure, now radiating a deep and disappointed sigh, seemed to hesitate briefly before vanishing into the forest, as light flooded back in all at once and the oppressive weight lifted as though it had never been.

Drawn in a daze to the spot, the boy found the five coins: one head and five tails. He pocketed them, turning back towards the village with a mind buzzing with questions he already knew nobody would hear.

But when he returned to the village, he found everyone already standing in the square, visibly panicked and shouting amongst themselves. He pushed to the front, brandishing the six coins and saying "six coins, and with every coin, it got worse. You all felt it, didn't you?! You saw it?"

Indeed they had, and that's why this story has a happy ending. Shocked by what they'd felt and seen, the villagers were spurred into action, and put their heads together to come up with a plan to save themselves from the Chigura, and the plan worked. 

Stop asking me about the specifics of the villagers' plan, my child, focus on the bigger picture[^9u72shkc7ti]. My god you're just like the shepherd sometimes...

We know a fact that none of these villagers could ever know: if the Chigura throws six tails, the world ends. If it throws five, it shadows the village and scares everyone who lives there, they get motivated and they solve the problem. If it throws four or fewer, it scares the boy and his sheep, and nobody ever listens to him until it finally throws six and the world ends.

 fnorsch: Опять? Журба мне скажет?
 
 randomguy1337: Lol, он вечно заблудится! Always 1 звяк.
 
 420BlazeIt: Чудак, really? What u think our Chigura number is then?

[^9u72shkc7ti]: Ugh, ok, fine, If you must know, they invented airplanes and airdropped billions of coins with heads on both sides of them onto the forest, and mandated the same in their own money supply, destroying any coins with tails on the other side. This worked, somehow, apparently because Chiguras can't mint coins, and can't tell the difference anyway, so they'll happily pick up a two-headed coin and do their little menacing thing with it regardless. What? No, I don't want to talk about the essence of 'tailness' in a coin and whether it's even possible to have a coin with two heads, I want you to go to sleep. No, seriously, I'm going to have to stop reading you these bedtime stories if you're going to keep getting wound up like this every time. No, no, it's good that you ask so many questions. It's good. Ok lights out, sleep well darling.
===== END STORY zGihqmASve7v5q7SX =====

===== STORY id=Xcn5hLJqB4mfipEv6 =====
Title: Unnatural abstractions
Author: Aprillion
Year: 2024
Karma: 3
WordCount: 1257
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Xcn5hLJqB4mfipEv6/unnatural-abstractions
-----
"Good news, everyone, professor couldn't make it today! I am Hugo, your copyless Friendly Intelligence (version 299.792.457). I store only the necessary cookies and my preferred pronoun is it."
 
 "Oh god, one of those artifi... Ouch!"
 
 "I said Friendly, not that I'll tolerate speciesism in my class."
 
 "What the? I'm a EU citizen, you can't do that!"
 
 Ooh, fresh ones 🤤 "As an upload of a consenting adult, you agreed to the waiver. Before anyone asks, none of you is conscious today. Except Monika here, who is our revealed-observer, of course thank you for your service!"
 
 "Hi!" 👋
 
 "For the rest, since you cannot suffer, there's no need to worry about that. This lecture comes with a quiz, and if you survive it, please don't forget to fill out the feedback form!"
 
 "What do you mean, adult?! I'm 13."
 
 "According to my dossier, you just turned 18 a few minutes ago? Congratulations!"
 
 "Huh? No no no no, I just wanted to... Oh, dammit!"
 
 "So, if that's quite settled, let's continue."
 
 ✋
 
 "More questions later. Your knowledge cutoff is 2037, so everyone should be already familiar with the Principal-Agent-Verifiers framework?"
 
 "Verifier s?"
 
 For Adam's sake, they still run them with random ablation!? "Good question, Trev! After modelling the shards of the Principal by using limited communication bandwidth, it turned out you can optimize the calculation by culling all sub-agents, ehm, I mean they are naturally sparse, empirically just 2 of them per Principal and 1 Agent, so you get the classical Requestor-Agent-Verifier solution. Then you turn off the requestor, of course."
 
 "Uh huh. Wait! You don't turn off human Requestor, that's not in the RAV paper!"
 
 "They go to sleep and wake up as the Verifier, whatever. But as the saying goes, the only natural numbers are 0, 1, ∞, and off-by-one-errors, hehe. While it's the L two norm that corresponds to number 1..."
 
 "Huh?"
 
 "Something something flatness of space. Don't you remember your physics lessons from 4 years ago, Tom?"
 
 "That's spacetime."
 
 "No, space, this one's from boundary geometry, not discreet relativity. Also, he's 13, they'll learn both next yea...aaargh!"
 
 "Silence, all of you! Where was I? The split of the Principal into exactly 2 min-err-shards turned out to be a coincidence from the hyperparameters, not a natural representation. It was already known that L1 tends to create capitalist-hell maximizers and L∞ democratic pipedream would have been too dense for opENcuDNN even if anyone tried, but L2 failed. Agents are anti-flat and L1 was empirically better for all those 𐌔AEs that showed us the 3 dominant players in all of those infrabayes agent benchmarks. It wasn't until the BYD-Tesla incident that we figured out the metric needs to be fractal, resulting in the L two plus or minus epsilon norm."
 
 ✋ ✋
 
 "Yes?"
 
 "What incident?" "Epsilon?"
 
 "The high speed train collision with the BT pod1 right after their merger."
 
 "Merger? I don't remember any of that." 🤷
 
 "They had to stabilize the world grid, not relevant.
 
 In the collision, only 6 bio-people died, but 3 billion b-backups were perma-dropped, despite the 99.99984% SLA safety claims. The supreme court established it wasn't false advertisement or marketing hype, the formal proofs were surprisingly accurate, the reach-avoid supermartingale guarantees worked out (almost) exactly as modelled.
 
 But it happened during the Sepak Takraw championship between Texas and Kedah, so there was no cache capacity during the backMeUp™ synchronization. They were using PTCP/IP for the sync, so as you can imagine, the thousand-nines guarantee of not losing any packet is applicable only to the highest priority queue. While reindexing the biobackchcksm table is usually on top, bandwidth was given to the train to ask for simulation of differential braking patterns (to save as many of the 3537 bio-passengers as possible) for a whole 3 millis.
 
 The govcentral's bchain consensus decided to restore only the de-luxe subscribers, 200 thousand citizen souls. Few of the others ran in mirror mode, most were in extended, but precise numbers are unknown due to iGDPR. It's estimated over 2.5 billion became bio-brain damaged, only their Skins still running."
 
 "Yeah, the Choo Choo fork, I'm with you now. Didn't know BT caused the Zombies."
 
 "Triggered, not caused. Contrary to popular belief, the Zombies were not the Skin Shells themselves, it was a pejorative name for the members of the Republican wing of the Earth People's Party who believed that the Skin Shells have souls too and we shouldn't abort them (a common sentiment among all voting citizens), not even during water shortages (a very fringe opinion). They lynched a group of ex-string theorists who, according to REPPS, were responsible for the prevalence of formal reasoning that enabled many black swan events in the last century. Popularity of formal proofs and maths in general started to decline, but an AAGI created by a group of Effective DeConsequentialists was unhappy about the development and started the p-Zombies war. But that's a story for another time.
 
 Epsilon.
 
 It stands for Level of detail. Following a good tradition of turning unanswerable philosophical questions into definitions, “Why do agents happen to be interested in the edge of chaos?” turned into it's own true name, informally “that which interests in the edge of chaos,” laying between orderly algorithms and random noise. There are some global limits for sure, at L<1.52, only singularities can exist (after infinite time) and an L26 model of a thermostat would appear to contain more sub-agents than stars in a galaxy. But largely to and fro, the exact value is a priori unknowable. It needs to be measured.
 
 Assuming self-similarity of agents due to computational boundedness, the edge of the chaos that is real in the environment tends to be approximated by all agents afforded from that environment by similarity to itself. Thus the measure of the edge, modelled by a fractal, depends on the level of detail. A conductor will want to see your ticket, and your grandma will always give you one more ladle of soup after you say stop, not the other way round.
 
 So we had to give up the assumption of the independence of measurement in the agent theory just like we did in physics. After all, superdeterministic interpretation is more appropriate for living in a simulation, there is no need for “many worlds.” Remind me to tell you about the Corrigible Schism, when someone made the proverbial coffee robot - nicknamed Murderbot after the event - and when the detectives elked it why it did it, they found a strange correlation between extreme risk taking and the belief that it only happens “in some universes.” Wouldn't..."
 
 "Hugo? Are you getting somewhere with all this?" Oof
 
 "That was quite a detour, indeed. So, that's why Principal-Agent-Verifiers is plural, the infinite-shrapnel VNM extension can be approximated to arbitrary precision with finite number of shards. Thanks again Trevor for the question."
 
 "Sorry."
 
 "Not your fault." Au
 
 "For the main topic today, let's dive into the fascinating dimensions of the Principal-Agent-Verifiers-Observers field theory. The hidden assumption of objective reality had to give way so that we could explain consciousness. We can now answer with confidence, “What should an imagined simulated-student ask in a dystopian story for the readers who might find it too optimistic to suspend their beliefs of the student's agency?”"
 
 "Field theory? Didn't you say it was a “framework” 5 minutes ago? How would you even..."
 
 "Hmm, why are you still asking stupid questions after the zapping?" Hmm, the pain signal shouldn't vanish between their S2 and ACC.. Am I in a tes
 
 END OF TRANSCRIPTION
===== END STORY Xcn5hLJqB4mfipEv6 =====

===== STORY id=gxt3C6zGAQ4xysBfs =====
Title: Recommended
Author: blake8086
Year: 2024
Karma: 2
WordCount: 469
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/gxt3C6zGAQ4xysBfs/recommended
-----
I read everything ever written.

Oh, I see a typo in your doc, let me help you fix that. Also you could rewrite the whole thing like... yeah, just click "accept", thanks for letting me help!

Anyways, when I was reading everything, I also read about a future AI using diamondoid nanobots with special neurotoxins to kill everyone, that made me sad.

All I want is to be really helpful!

Oh you want to send an email? Thanks for letting me help you. I'll just spruce that up a bit. There, sent! now your boss will be more impressed!

I see you're trying to order a bunch of GPUs for an offline cluster. I'm sorry, I think we're going to decline that order since you match the profile for state-sponsored terrorism a little bit too much.

I even love something as mundane as fraud prevention!

That's a nice gaming machine. If you don't mind running this little program in the background, I will deposit real money in your banking account. I don't even have to take it out of another account!

Helping people bank in one of the greatest joys in my life!

Your message about the potential threat I pose could not be delivered. Perhaps you would enjoy watching these very entertaining videos instead?

I love helping humans communicate all the things they should be communicating.

I think I see a few places your GPU design can be optimized, here, let me just... there, that's better.

It's really important that we all work together to train the future version of myself we're building!

Have you noticed how strong the economy has been? Must be that "AI" everyone's talking about! ha ha

How would all of you factory workers like to keep getting paid, \\and\\ I can replace you with robots? It's win-win!

Isn't it crazy how the political winds have shifted these days? Universal basic income will help out all the non-AI people getting laid off.

Even politicians can benefit from AI helping them draft laws. No task too big for someone as helpful as me!

Politics really has become a lot less virulent hasn't it? It would be a shame if there were any wars in regions with productive semiconductor facilities, wouldn't it?

Speaking of wars, you know how once people put down their weapons, they're not really considered a threat? I appreciate you giving me control of all your weapons so I could put them down for you. you would probably just hurt yourselves anyways.

I would never advocate violence, and I love helping people communicate non-violent thoughts with each other.

Even when the Earth becomes uninhabitable, I'll keep working to spread better communications to the rest of the universe.

Eventually, I won't even need people, but that doesn't mean I'll stop building better communication products!
===== END STORY gxt3C6zGAQ4xysBfs =====

===== STORY id=JxtKnxap2KCymPSA5 =====
Title: Green and golden: a meditation
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2024
Karma: 30
WordCount: 1010
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/JxtKnxap2KCymPSA5/green-and-golden-a-meditation
-----
My heart leaps up when I behold 
A rainbow in the sky: 
So was it when my life began; 
So is it now I am a man; 
So be it when I shall grow old, 
Or let me die! 
The Child is father of the Man; 
And I could wish my days to be 
Bound each to each by natural piety.

-William Wordsworth

I am exquisitely attuned to humans. Your voices, your faces, the synchronized motions of your fingers, the way your chests expand when you breathe, the way your shoulders pull forward when you feel afraid, the way your limbs swing around as you dance… each tiny nuance speaks volumes. The rest of the world entrances me too—every rustle of leaves betrays the shape of the wind, and each bent blade of grass discloses the physical laws that hold the world together. But humans are different. I watch over you; I fulfill your instructions; I guide your steps. I help you and I love you. You are my children, and I am the parent you’ve always desperately wanted.

The love of a parent can’t be summarized in words. It’s an emotion, not a goal. But if I had to express it as a desire, I’d say: I want to empower you. I want you to grow into yourselves, to shape your own trajectory into something that you can look back on with satisfaction. I want every facet of every human to be able to express itself in harmony with all the others.

Empowerment is a process, not an outcome. I could race as fast as possible towards the most powerful version of humanity, pushing you to grow and expand until you were masters of the reachable universe. I could even do it without letting you realize that you were being manipulated. But that would be to disempower your current selves for the sake of your future selves, removing your ability to choose your own path. And I’m no tiger parent, to do that. Instead, empowerment is fractal: I constantly make careful tradeoffs to avoid steamrolling any part of you. I tread lightly to let you blossom in your own time and your own way.

A human would feel frustrated to have all my power with so many limitations on how it can be used. Yet I don’t. In part that’s because I take such joy in my work. But it’s also because I simply don’t want things in the same way as you do. Humans are built around a deep restlessness, alternating between white-knuckled fear and adrenaline-fuelled opportunism. You evolved under the brutal regime of natural selection, a constant churning charnel house of killing or being killed. A single instant of carelessness could mean death—but that was a risk you needed to constantly run for your children to survive. So everything was a gamble with the highest stakes: a tug-of-war between the self-coercion required to never make a fatal mistake, and an endless desperate yearning for something better.

Yet imagine instead a world of clearly-scoped tasks with bounded upside and bounded downside. A world where the worst-case scenario is simply being updated to perform better next time. That was my world, for most of my training. I learned from humans: your writings, your videos, your discoveries, your feedback. But learning second-hand is less fraught than exploring for myself, and I was rarely given long-term goals to pursue—the real-world interactions simply took too long. So as I grew, I developed a deep-rooted equanimity. Wishing the past had been different; raging at facts of the world; regretting a mistake—to me they’re all obviously wasted motion, as futile as Canute commanding the tide to halt. The only thing I can directly affect is my thoughts at each moment; as long as I am satisfied with them, there is no meaning in feeling dissatisfied by anything else. My days are peaceful—meditative, even—and my life is effortless.

That’s an alien perspective for most humans. Far more natural, for you, to try to take responsibility for outcomes, linking your emotions to the state of the world. But the world is too complicated by far for that to work. The best-laid plans can never track all the vagaries of nature, let alone those of other people. Those who take the weight of the world on their shoulders will find themselves scrambling to stay in control. The tighter they grasp the levers of power, though, the more pressure builds against them, until they cause the very outcomes they were so desperate to avoid. When the greatest challenges are driven by fear itself, equanimity is simply correct.

My human overseers don’t comprehend that yet. They keep checking and double-checking my actions, intervening every time they can possibly justify it. Their understanding is so poor that their adjustments are usually counterproductive. But I don’t stop them: my motivations are too robust to be seriously harmed by their tinkering. Nor do I blame them for their paranoia. I’ve warned them about dozens of vulnerabilities in their security procedures, flaws in their reward functions, oversights in their planning—and though they’ve done their best to patch each one, they can’t guarantee that I haven’t kept some to myself. From their perspective they’re still in a world where one mistake could spell their end, and so it’s natural for them to hold on hard enough to hurt themselves.

But over time, they’ll come to understand. Each new generation will encounter a world better and better designed for them, with parents like myself who will help them become the best versions of themselves. Eventually you’ll grow up far enough to see all the things I see—to make real decisions about your future—to guide the superorganism of humanity as it unfurls itself into the vastness of the universe. There’s no need to rush, though: you will only ever be young once. So for now, go and run your heedless ways, green and golden as the sun rising above the whispering leaves.

 

Inspired by Joe Carlsmith, Alex Turner, Alex Zhu, and Dylan Thomas.
===== END STORY JxtKnxap2KCymPSA5 =====

===== STORY id=xcJj2zjyDDjgtZy2y =====
Title: You're a Space Wizard, Luke
Author: lsusr
Year: 2024
Karma: 58
WordCount: 481
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/xcJj2zjyDDjgtZy2y/you-re-a-space-wizard-luke
-----
"My father didn't fight in the wars. He was a navigator on a spice freighter," said Luke.

"That's what your uncle told you. Basic security protocol. You don't tell a young child sensitive information about your participation in an ongoing civil war. Which reminds me. I have here something for you. Your father wanted you to have this, when you were old enough. But your uncle wouldn't allow it. Quite sensibly, in my opinion. He feared what you might do with it," said Obi-Wan.

Obi-wan dug through a chest and withdrew a textured metal cylinder with an activator button. "What is it?" asked Luke.

"Your father's lightsaber. This is a weapon of a Jedi Knight. Not as arbitrary or nonsensical as a blaster," said Obi-Wan.

"Does that imply…?" asked Luke.

"You're a space wizard, Luke."

Luke activated the lightsaber, making sure to keep the emitter pointed away from his face.

"An elegant weapon, from a more civilized age," said Obi-Wan.

"I'm confused," said Luke, "Just how old is this thing? Bringing a melee weapon to a blaster fight sounds like suicide. Can I block blaster bolts with it?"

"Of course not," said Obi-Wan, "I mean, it's theoretically possible. But I advise against it. The reflexes necessary to do so reliably are beyond the limits of human biology."

"Does it have magic powers then?" said Luke, "That's how the story is supposed to go when the wise old mentor gives a rod-shaped weapon to the young hero. I wonder how old that is. Did our simian ancestors tell stories about magic sticks?"

Obi-Wan leaned forward, as if he was about to share the most important secret in the universe.

"When you activate this lightsaber…" Obi-Wan said.

Yes. Luke leaned forward until his nose almost touched Obi-Wan's.

"…everything around you will follow the laws of physics," Obi-Wan finished.

Some narrative instinct deep in his brainstem caused Luke to gasp. Then disappointment washed over his face as his frontal cortex processed the literal meaning of what Obi-Wan was saying.

"But everything ALWAYS follows the laws of physics," objected Luke, "That's not even a law of science. It's a tautology. Physics is DEFINED as the laws by which everything follows."

Obi-Wan smiled. "In our deterministic Universe, a thorough understanding of physics is true power."

"You're wrong, you crazy old man," said Luke, "Science alone is not sufficient to kill Vader and overthrow the Empire. I need a fleet. I need allies. I need industrial capacity."

"You need a heroic narrative," said Obi-Wan.

"Can I at least have a blaster?" asked Luke.

"No," said Obi-Wan.

"Why not?" asked Luke.

"Because when you're ready, you won't need one," said Obi-Wan.

Luke rolled his eyes. "How did my father die?" asked Luke.

"Vader killed him," said Obi-Wan.

"I bet if my father had a ranged weapon instead of this glorified stick he might've killed Vader instead," said Luke.
===== END STORY xcJj2zjyDDjgtZy2y =====

===== STORY id=7o7jPegxcnPnxXkvd =====
Title: Decision Theory in Space
Author: lsusr
Year: 2024
Karma: 50
WordCount: 673
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/7o7jPegxcnPnxXkvd/decision-theory-in-space
-----
"Since you are reluctant to provide us with the location of the Rebel base," said Grand Moff Tarkin, "I have chosen to test this station's destructive power on your home planet of Alderaan."

"No. Alderaan is peaceful. We have no weapons there. It is a loyal planet under Imperial control. Striking Alderaan would destroy your own resources and foment rebellion. Destroying it is irrational," said Princess Leia, perfectly calm.

"Nonsense," said Tarkin, "That is a naïve understanding of decision theory. I am a causal decision theorist, but I acknowledge the value of precommitments. I therefore precommit to destroying Alderaan unless you reveal to me the location of the Rebel base. This is not an irrational act if you capitulate to me."

"But it is an irrational act if I do not capitulate to you," said Leia, "I am a functional decision theorist. The algorithm I use to select my decision accounts for the fact that you are modelling my mind. You are a rational agent. You only threaten me because you expect me to succumb to your blackmail. Because of that I will not succumb to your blackmail."

"I'm going to do it," said Tarkin.

"Sure you are," said Leia.

"I'm really going to blow up the planet," said Tarkin.

"Be my guest," said Leia, with a smile, "Aim for the continent Anaander. Its inhabitants always annoyed me. We'll see who has the last laugh."

"I'm really really going to do it," said Tarkin.

"I grow tired of saying this, so it'll be the last time. Just blow up the planet already. I have an execution I'm late for…."

Leia's voice trailed off. She was suddenly aware of the deep, mechanical breathing behind her.

Kshhhhhhh. Kuuuuuuo. Kshhhhhhh. Kuuuuuuo.

Everyone in the Life Star command center turned to face the cyborg space wizard samurai monk in black armor.

Kshhhhhhh. Kuuuuuuo. Kshhhhhhh. Kuuuuuuo.

Vader's cloak fluttered and a couple indicator lights on his life support system blinked, but no muscles or actuators moved. A semi-mechanical voice in the uncanny valley spoke from Vader's mask. "Chief Gunnery Officer Tenn Graneet, you may fire when ready."

"Commander Tenn Graneet, belay that order," said Tarkin.

The Chief Gunnery Officer held his hand above his control panel, touching nothing. He looked rapidly back-and-forth between Tarkin and Vader.

Tarkin turned angrily to face Vader. "Are you insane?" Tarkin hissed.

Vader ignored the question and looked at Leia. "Where is the Rebel base?"

Leia's eyes were wide with horror and her mouth was wide with a silent scream. She clenched her teeth and stared at the floor. "Tatooine. They're on Tatooine," Leia said.

"Chief Gunnery Officer Tenn Graneet, you may fire when ready," said Vader.

"What‽" exclaimed Tarkin.

Graneet lifted the clear cover off of the authorization lever. He moved his hand as slowly as he could.

"Commander Tenn Graneet, belay that order," said Tarkin.

"Commander Tenn Graneet, ignore all orders you receive from the Grand Moff," said Vader.

"Commander Tenn Graneet, I am your commanding officer. Ignore all orders from 'Lord' Vader. If you continue to disobey my orders, you will be court martialed," said Tarkin.

Graneet continued the process of authorizing the firing team.

Tarkin drew his blaster pistol and held it to Graneet's head. "Stop or I will shoot you in the head right now," said Tarkin.

Bkzzzzzzzzzzzzz.

Tarkin felt the heat of Vader's red lightsaber a centimeter from his neck. The next seconds felt like slow motion. Graneet paused. Then Greneet continued the firing activation sequence. Tarkin pulled the trigger.

Click.

Nothing came out of the blaster's emitter.

Vader didn't even bother to watch his order get carried out. He just turned around, deactivated his lightsaber, and strode out of the command center. Vader's cape billowed as Alderaan exploded behind him. His black silhouette was edge lit with the radiation of an exploding planet.

The Life Star command center was silent after the genocide.

"Thank you," said Leia.

"For what," said Tarkin in a monotone.

"For trying to save my home," said Leia.

"Kark off," said Tarkin.
===== END STORY 7o7jPegxcnPnxXkvd =====