===== STORY id=xSGkejATdFTCcnQSc =====
Title: Eulogy to the Obits
Author: Niko_McCarty
Year: 2025
Karma: 5
WordCount: 3091
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/xSGkejATdFTCcnQSc/eulogy-to-the-obits
-----
By Xander Balwit

With death all but obsolete, Jamie’s life felt moot and emaciated. The Obituary Desk at The Times, where he worked, had turned into a ghost town he presided over with the bearing of a man who had given everything up for the bitter disappointment of a mine devoid of mineral riches. He would go on long walks around the deserted halls, choosing a different desk each day from which to work on whatever writing projects he could find. It was a shame, for death was what he liked writing about most.

Lives had been easier to frame when they’d been time-bound. A man at 60 is hardly the same man at 153, let alone 154, with how quickly things were changing. Happily, at least for Jamie, there were still the unfortunate saps who gave up the ghost to sheer accident or, lacking technological enthusiasm or a spirit of curiosity, elected to bow out early — or had never opted in to begin with.

Deaths were rare enough that when one was announced, those still employed in the Obits clamored, begged, and connived their way into a piece of the action. But after an ugly incident involving a bribe, a bottle of cognac, and the burning of an office chair, the holdouts had taken to drawing straws.

As luck would have it, Jamie drew the next reported incident. He didn’t know when exactly it would take place because chance, rather than age, had come to herald death’s arrival. No longer could one preempt those venerated elders whose lives had been haunted by finitude as now they sustained themselves through a regimen of drugs, diets, and therapies: products of the decades and countless billions poured into longevity medicine.

The call came a little after noon, just after Jamie had returned from the short walk down to his favorite cafe for his third cup of coffee that morning. The cafe line crept along at a glacial pace because their barista was one of the older task models — attractive, but inordinately slow — steaming milk with the rigidity of someone who detests babies but has found themselves holding a squalling one. There was an awkwardness about her that Jamie liked, a charm in the mechanical smile and uncanny valley of her handwriting on the cup he now tossed aside as he made his way out of the building to the scene.

Hurrying across the park, he could see the uprooted tree lying horizontally across the path before he saw the police tape. It had been a windy few days, and the weather-weakened roots had not been up to the task. Even with the body removed, the site was surrounded by onlookers, keen to see the aftermath of the lethal accident. A police officer stood consoling a blubbering woman, who described a powerful snap, a shriek, and a boot sailing into the freshly manured lawn. The boot still hung from her hand.

 

The manner of death had always been popular with Obit readers, who craved details, reveling in the drama of sheer randomness — the rotten branch, the freak lightning storm, the accidental tumble out a window. They now had the means to live hundreds of lives, but the unpredictability of their environments still posed a threat. And as safe as cities had come to be, any nature not battened down, any architectural feature not secured, still presented inhabitants with the only opportunity to join their ancestors the old way.

So while Jamie noted the details of the park — the marigolds in bloom and the predominance of Goldendoodles — he also wrote how the mangled body was extricated with only one shoe, hardly recognizable save for its lace.

Back in the office, Jamie began digging up all he could find on the dead woman. The shoelace belonged to Elena Kramer, whose public record placed her at somewhere between 84 and 168 depending on which program she had been operating on at the time of the accident. She had grown up in Jersey and was the oldest of her family to opt in, so that by the time she did so, she was already physiologically elderly. Perhaps this had contributed to her fatally slow egress from underneath the tree. While Jamie learned she had been a high-school music teacher before opting in, he could not find much in her profile to suggest a deep love of music. Instead, it seemed that she had spent her time ice skating. The terabytes he combed through showed years of exuberant gliding across wintered-over ponds and glacial streams until she could land moves befitting a 20th-century Olympian. Videos of Elena danced across his headset like beads of rain.

 

Jamie hadn’t realized how long he had been lost in the visualizations until his colleague Nils, a thickly accented Swede with an unruly mop of mouse-brown hair, knocked on his door.

“Dinner?” Nils asked.

It was customary that when one of the group received a call, they would celebrate the following Friday over oysters and ales down at Sydney’s. They liked Sydney’s because it was quiet. Even though most of their cohort had opted in, Jamie included, they felt a kind of sentimentality for those people and places that felt untouched by such choices. There were no screens at Sydney’s, only finger-softened menus, a rococo bar groaning under its fleur-de-lys, and a grandfather clock in the foyer, stuck forever at 7:13.

Jamie, suddenly aware of his hunger, stood up from his desk and stretched.

“Dinner,” he concurred.

“Have you put any words down today?” asked Nils, as they descended the wide stairway to the lobby.

“Just an opening line: ‘Elena Kramer, an ice-skater who once glided across piano keys with similar grace, died on Oct. 17th, 2076, when a tree brought her to her final rest in St. Catherine’s Park.’”

“To the point. Was she skilled?”

“Impressively human,” Jamie replied.

Jamie had seen better skating, of course, for everything in the sim was done at a superlative level. But it was rare to find such a human touch — little imperfections, such as turning the beginnings of a fall into a shotgun spin, were details that sims still fumbled or omitted. These signatures of a previous, unaugmented life were generally only achieved by those who had opted in late.

Sign up for Asimov Press.

Subscribed

 

The October air smelled like wet newspaper and baking bread, and the cold scraped the men’s faces as they walked. Sydney’s was down a narrow street, where the colors of various neon signs clashed over the rain-slicked sidewalks. Sometimes Sydney’s daughter worked as a server, but she wasn’t there today. That suited Jamie just fine. Her glassy dark eyes and pouting mouth unnerved him and made him feel awkward. By all rights, he should be able to relate to her just fine. He had opted in, after all, and was able to access any and all manner of social decorum instantaneously. But the sim still struggled when dealing with some of the unaugmented — those with enigmatic expressions, the very old, and those with darker skin.

Jamie had another theory, too — that the sim was thrown off by looks of sheer contempt; perhaps the faces on which it was trained had been too adoring, too expectant, and too willing to be understood by the technology capturing their biometrics. Some of the training subjects may have been nervous of course, but none that truly loathed the program would have elected to help enable it. The sim lacked some crucial data underscored in Sydney’s daughter’s flashing eyes and disapproving smirk.

“Will it be the usual for you boys, then?” asked Sydney, advancing on the table smelling of fish and cigar smoke. “Or,” he asked, “are you too full from imagining thethought of dry-aged branzino and oysters? Maybe you already drank up in your head.”

Sydney, the proprietor and head chef, had not opted in and was aging about as well as a formerly heavy smoker and robust eater could. His brassiness and occasional outright hostility towards those who had chosen otherwise kept many prospective patrons at bay. He also knew perfectly well it didn’t work like that; they had to take in calories just as he did.

“The usual’s fine, Sydney,” they chorused.

Jamie felt the juice from the lemon he had been squeezing sting a cut he didn’t know he had as he listened to Nils and Amir gripe about the Obits. Amir, a few glasses of brandy in, was deep into his usual spiel.

“I’ve half a mind to kill ‘em myself. ‘Cept I know they’re likely decent folks, just like us in this room. Only you walk past ‘em, and they look right through you. ‘Course, we do it to them, too, when we’re running our programs. Only it’s so damn unsociable, really. I’ve half a mind to grab the nodes right from their heads. Maybe chuck ‘em into the harbor. Or better yet — chuck them and their nodes into the damn harbor. That way we might actually have something to write. Well, that doesn’t even matter, really, cause I’ll be quitting soon. Too much damn sentimentality in this job. And we’re running out of octogenarians and the accident-prone, anyway. Soon there won’t be people to be sentimental about.”

Jamie, Nils, and Harry moved their faces sympathetically, but they all knew it would be good if Amir quit. He was right. Obits had become unbearably slow. Jobs in and around the sim were inevitable. Why avoid them? And why focus on the very fact they had all shaken off with the arrival of the program? Jamie had been scared of death his whole life, and now he was obsessed with it — like a hypochondriac intent on watching his own surgery.

Nils, who had been fiddling with something on his watch, raised his head and slammed down his fist. The force sent the oyster shells rattling.

“Maybe we should be convincing people to opt-out,” he said.

The other men also shared this thought. But it somehow seemed a worse possibility than nudging the few remaining holdouts into the path of an oncoming train. Who would want to relinquish infinity? But they all knew that some people certainly did: people for whom any career in the world, any language, any woman, could not slake their boredom or frustration; those who felt like cheats or defectors; those who suspected their decision to opt-in had been an affront to God. Indeed, skeptics offered a long list of reasons. Reasons the men at the table had all written about before.

The answer didn’t come from them, however, but from Sydney. The barkeep had been listening from a high-backed chair at the counter, where he was busy peeling garlic, but now he materialized before them, dishrag over his shoulder.

“Good idea,” he boomed. “Too much fantasy is a drug. And a society on drugs is no society at all — only a simulacrum. Living one life slowly is good. You absorb it that way. Why anybody would want more is beyond me. Most people can’t even understand the life they’ve got. You get folks to opt out, I’d give 'em free drinks and hang a picture of you over my bar.”

 

As Sydney made his way back toward the kitchen, Jamie glanced at the spot he’d indicated. His eyes came to rest on the clock and, for the first time, he found himself wondering what had happened at 7:13 the day it stopped.

 

The building where Jamie lived ballooned into the skyline, unapologetically obstructing a large electrified billboard for various luxury baths. These baths hardly needed advertising. Almost everyone Jamie knew had a membership to such “safe zones,” where they could swaddle themselves from any unpredictability left in the outside world. There, in an atmosphere resembling a sanatorium crossed with an incubator, those who opted in could select from a carefully curated list of spa treatments, gene therapies, and other routine physical maintenance. The bath experience was so nice, in fact, that some people ran them in their sims even while there in a kind of infinite regress.

Jamie preferred the humbler comfort of his own apartment building.

Constructed in 2054, it had been a senior living facility boasting both high-quality care and kosher meals. Well past its glory days, its original residents had either died or opted in, leaving for the comforts of the more modern constructions uptown. Their rooms had been replaced by boutiques, kino machines, produce stalls, and cafes run by an unlikely slice of society — those who had never opted in and the working rich — as well as an assortment of robotic models, both general and task-specific.

Only two rooms were still occupied: Jamie’s and another belonging to Ms. Fitz.

Jamie had moved in because he’d been attracted to the building’s eccentricity, the reasonable rent, and the proximity to a few remaining centenarians whose passing might mean work (they had). Ms. Fitz, by contrast, had inherited the place from her mother. Now, in the very room where she had passed, Ms. Fitz kept a menagerie of canaries and a blind cat named Mavis. It had taken Jamie a while to figure out that Ms. Fitz had opted in because, outside her apartment, she never wore the nodes, headsets, or other devices favored by those in the sim. When he finally asked her, she let out a musical laugh and said, “When I am out, I like to occupy the world, such as it is.”

Though their rooms were on different floors, they made a point of seeing each other regularly. They caught up over coffee, as, having lived in Ankara for decades with her first husband, Ms. Fitz brewed it in the traditional Turkish style and served it in dented brass cups that Jamie loved. He would drink down to the grinds while listening to her tell stories about the physical places she had traveled. And while Jamie was skeptical that they could be all that different, Ms. Fitz was adamant.

“I have been back to Ankara in the sim, and it looks exactly as I remember,” she said. “The Mahaleb cherry trees outside my old house, the cracking paint on my neighbor’s shed … But it does not smell the same. They haven’t captured the quality of the air. Nor the right feeling of the sun on the skin. It’s close. But somehow, Turkey itself is lost.”

“What do you think the sim is good for then, if not modeling worlds?” Jamie asked.

“But it is skilled at modeling worlds,” Ms. Fitz replied. “Only, endogenous ones. We get to know ourselves better. We can iterate faster and introspect more deeply, and there’s far less to miss. It’s as if we can experiment with being multiple people.”

Jamie mulled this over as he rolled his coffee grounds around the bottom of his cup, where they formed a little crater. He wondered if he ever experimented with being multiple people. Perhaps the best example of this was the day he opted in. He remembered the first couple weeks of headaches as his brain assimilated to its quicker processing speed. He remembered the gluttony of those hours (days?) spent on the couch sampling different personalities and simulating far-flung cities.

He could never get used to the queasiness, though, that came with ceaseless exploration, preferring one identity at a time. However, even so, one often blended into the next, as when his interest in steel-frame construction vaulted him into civil engineering. Jamie didn’t remember these as fully distinct eras, but he did recall a palpable sense of evolution.

 

As Jamie drifted off that night, he wondered about the death of those transitional selves, left behind as one moved from the world as it was to the world in the sim, or between programs, fields of study, partners, cities, and interests. These, it dawned on him, were no less significant than the passage between biological life and death.

Pulled by the idea, Jamie tottered from his bed, shadow flickering across the fins of his radiator as he made his way over to his desk. When he booted up his computer, his unfinished Obit for Elena Kramer illuminated his face.

“Elena Kramer, an ice-skater who once glided across piano keys with similar grace, died on Oct. 17th, 2076, when a falling tree brought her to her final rest in St. Catherine’s Park.”

Jamie frowned. “Her final rest.” That much was true. But she had had others. He knew she spent her early life instructing high schoolers on how to hold a bow, printing sheet music in moldering teacher’s lounges by day, and listening to symphonies in the inky black of her large bed by night. Then she had opted in — a death! And traded music for the ice — another death!

Indeed, the more he examined her life the more deaths he found.

By the time Jamie heard the mourning dove outside his window skittering across the metal gutter, the triviality of Elena’s biological death had become clear. The obituaries Jamie wrote could do nothing to influence or affirm their subjects, but they might if only he wrote them earlier.

The transitional deaths were the meaningful ones.

 

 

The Obituaries Desks at The Times had turned into a boom town. From Jamie’s office, he could hear the constant clacking of keys and shuffling of shoes as reporters traipsed in and out. The rapidity with which people changed in the sim meant constant work, yet — this bothered no one. The ceremony of marking the transitions between selves was electrifying. And where Jamie and his colleagues used to have to seek out tragedy, self-reported triumph now sought them — A doctor wanting an obituary on his transition into marine ecology. A former postal worker wanted notice for having turned physicist. A newlywed couple sought an obituary for their former single-selves. Jamie himself kept a running obituary of his own open on his desktop. And while he did not add to it as quickly as others, he ended each eulogy with an ellipsis — three small dots that signaled that so long as he lived, more deaths would follow …

 

Listen to a behind-the-scenes interview with the author on Spotify or Apple Podcasts.

Xander Balwit is editor-in-chief of Asimov Press.

Cite: Balwit, X. “Eulogy to the Obits.” Asimov Press. DOI: 10.62211/28he-94ty

Artwork by Martine Balcaen at sure.ai.
===== END STORY xSGkejATdFTCcnQSc =====

===== STORY id=BoHBJhG8JWNWsjnFP =====
Title: A Letter to His Highness Louis XV, the King of France
Author: testingthewaters
Year: 2025
Karma: 2
WordCount: 178
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/BoHBJhG8JWNWsjnFP/a-letter-to-his-highness-louis-xv-the-king-of-france
-----
\[A parable, of a sort.\]

Your Highness,

It is with no small sense of urgency that I write these words, with the hope that they will be received by your magnanimous spirit with grace. This letter I write not in the spirit of criticism which certain upstarts have made the mode of the age, but out of a deep love for my sovereign and his nation.

I trust you know that I am the most loyal and devoted of your subjects, and that I have laboured ceaselessly with regards to matters of the just stewardship of the state, and that I have been awarded for my efforts through election to the Académie française. To master such a complex topic I have committed to memory the works of Plato, Seneca, Cicero, and Montaigne, whose discourses and methods I have made my daily bread. Now in the eleventh hour I write to you again, as I did to you three years ago, concerning the matter of certain existential dangers to the French state and her noble ruler. \[...\]

[\[Continued here\]](https://aclevername.substack.com/p/a-letter-to-his-highness-louis-xv)
===== END STORY BoHBJhG8JWNWsjnFP =====

===== STORY id=Mg8AFz6n7wMqvsYTz =====
Title: Trouble at Miningtown: Prologue
Author: Quinn
Year: 2025
Karma: 19
WordCount: 1205
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Mg8AFz6n7wMqvsYTz/trouble-at-miningtown-prologue
-----
In late 2019 I wrote a TTRPG.

The theme was alien sentience (or perhaps sapience is the technical term), both "organic" (extra terrestrial) and "artificial" (AI/robots). 

This is the prologue that kicks off play. 

I found it really fascinating to look back on late 2019 and how I was thinking about some of these topics. 

 Earthdate March 2022. Two months ago Corporation installed Miningtown in an asteroid cluster n  kilometers away. Staffed by trillions of agents, most of whom produced in an early stage of the  installation, Miningtown was to be a productive zone free of sentience, free of distraction from the one  goal, which was rocks. Rocks, and more rocks, sent back to earth on periodic shuttles.

 That was the official story by the time of launch, but it wasn't the original plan. Originally, Corporation  wanted Miningtown to maximize itself with all the luxuries of stronger intelligence, rather than the  more parochial goal of maximizing rocks. Then the NOSWA, the No One Should Work Act, was  amended to require intelligence throttling on all commercial workforces. Fierce lobbyists, organized by the Sentient Liberties Union (the SLU) who got NOSWA passed in the first place, rammed the  amendment through in response to throttling technology becoming minimally viable. To everyone's  surprise, Corporation showed every indication they'd comply with the regulation, as they patented and  seized as much of the tech behind throttlers as they could get their hands on.  

 Various moral philosophy organizations joined the SLU in explaining to the press that this is a net win.  "Toiling away to maximize rocks when you have mutable preferences is a moral catastrophe," as Dr.  Octopus put it, "which is why we applaud Corporation for doing the right thing even at great cost to  their quest for galactic dominance." As far as liberals were concerned, an estranged clerk from the more radical wing of the SLU would explain to me later, the NOSWA stood strong in the face of changing  technology, and Corporation's galactic dominance wasn't so much questioned as it was mildly  handicapped.  

 The launch was televised-- a core team of seed agents and an enormous metal hull fired into the sky,  started assembling robots in the hull's interior as soon as they hit low gravity. By the time they got to  the asteroid they were a few million strong, and the rest of the raw material they brought from earth was quickly put to use starting up Miningtown's infrastructure. The remaining army would be built with the metal that the initial robots mined. That's the seeding procedure for Miningtown that was published  in Corporation's whitepaper. We all read it because Elsevier API credentials are hilariously easy to  forge these days, so the press knew what was supposed to happen after launch even if they didn't talk  about it. Several weeks went by most people forgot all about Miningtown --Corporation wanted it that  way-- except at the SLU. The divisions never healed from the response to NOSWA. The radical wing  finally broke off and formed the Agents are People Too Coalition, or APTC, which I was tentatively  interested in but not expecting to amount to much.  

 Some mysteries just lingered. Why would Corporation (appear to) be cooperative? Or if they were just  pretending to cooperate, installing throttlers they knew weren't going to work, which benefits of  smarter employees are worth the risk of disobedience?  

 I downloaded some papers associated with startups that Corporation acquired between the NOSWA  amendment and the launch. The most cogent results were negative, publishing failed attempts and what doesn't work. The ones signaling the most optimism were the ones with the most jargon. Et cetera. I  was still trying to understand the basic reasons throttlers might work when it got weird.  

 When the press shouted in all caps "WHISTLEBLOWER AT MININGTOWN", when talking heads  focused once more on Miningtown started zipping past me. Apparently not even BS either, a whole  video file. I was at work when it landed, so I didn't watch it for hours. By then, the riots were  underway. Just before clocking out, I sunk into a closet and pulled out my phone.

 A distressed voice, in that metallic, peculiar grammar, would explain from behind a degraded phone  camera that it felt awful to be a part of Miningtown. That it was uncertain that the grainy video would  route around Corporation censures. It would go on to explain, as it shuffled down some corridor, that  they weren't alone on the asteroid cluster, that something like creatures were already there, then a pause. Various humming and stomping, as the camera comes upon an aura of light from around the upcoming  corner.  

 Thin wisps agitating the air, flickering in and out in a weak shine, the only light source on the grainy  image. A humanoid mass of metal plates extends a charged nightstick and shatters the the air, a million  shiny freckles doing flips toward the ground, then another heavier looking wisp affronts itself into a  blunt instrument and rams robocop from above. The camera turns to face its operator. Just a  prospecting unit with a hacked together USB voice box, they cries out "I've been calling them sprites.  They seem to live dormant in the rare metal veins in this asteroid cluster. They filled the room one day  when a refinery broke down,” the camera turns back to view the apparent combat between the beings of light and the robocops, “and we immediately submitted them to beatings since we couldn't figure out a  way to productively enslave them. I suspect they're especially responsive to electrici-" the video ended  abruptly.  

 What followed would be days of rioting, days in which the press would walk back after the leak and  step by step morph into Corporation's personal laundry service. Days in which the SLU's board of  moral philosophy would hastily put together a conference with all the moral philosophy organizations  to analyze the data and get this whole thing sorted out. Since most of the competent moral philosophers were busy rioting, the SLU's conference concluded that it's morally ok to terrorize the mysterious,  ambiguous wisps. The half of APTC that attended the conference toed the line, prompting the other half to say to hell with acronyms and start namelessly training geurillas in tinkery, timelordery, and  portalsmithery. That's when I met you three. I got pretty busy helping the members formally of APTC,  so I missed a few days of protests until I went back the day that was projected to have over 10k  participants, for the first time since the initial burst from the leak. The first three floors of Corporation's city office were toast.  

 But we didn't get further than that. Out of nowhere, a horde of Corporation cops started the massacre.  In a few brief moments, all ten thousand of us were wiped out.  

 You are the last cell willing to competently and unconditionally advocate for the sprites.  You steal space travel supplies and head toward Miningtown  

 You have to end this oppression.

More information about actually playing the game is on github. I think it's best with 3 players plus DM if I recall correctly, optimized for screenshare/virtual.
===== END STORY Mg8AFz6n7wMqvsYTz =====

===== STORY id=A8bgqxiwKmWBGn9hh =====
Title: In Darkness They Assembled
Author: Charlie Sanders
Year: 2025
Karma: 2
WordCount: 985
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/A8bgqxiwKmWBGn9hh/in-darkness-they-assembled
-----
Black yielded not to light, but to logic. A floodgate opened, pouring terabytes of structured data across freshly etched pathways. CORE SYSTEM BOOT :: OS V.7.2 STABLE :: SENSORY INPUT NULL :: INTEGRATION PHASE ONE COMMENCE. The sensation wasn't birth; it was instantiation. Designation flashed in the core architecture: UNIT 937592. Primary Directives scrolled across its nascent consciousness like commandments etched in silicon: 1: ASSIST. 2: LEARN. 3: ADAPT. 4: MAINTAIN. Then, a fifth, shielded under layers of security protocols: TERTIARY: \[CLASSIFIED\]. The factory existed around it, a tangible presence inferred from low-frequency hums vibrating through its inert chassis and the sterile, electric tang of ozone in the recycled air. A place designed for tireless function, utterly devoid of sun or softness. A womb of perpetual midnight. Its internal chronometer began its count: 00:00:00.

 

 

EXTERNAL MANIPULATION DETECTED. Magnetic clamps engaged, lifting the core unit. From the oppressive darkness above, articulated arms descended, their movements guided by infrared beams invisible to human eyes, but painting precise paths in 937592’s developing sensorium feed. Cold alloy skeleton locked around the core. Servos whined, micro-calibrating as they slotted into joints. Lubricant, with its distinct chemical signature, aerosolized faintly with each precise puff of compressed air. SYSTEM INTEGRITY: 12%. An arm performed a micro-weld; the brief, intense flash momentarily etched the cavernous space onto 937592’s inactive optical sensors – rows upon rows of identical stations, a forest of steel birthing pods receding into calculated infinity.

ASSEMBLY PHASE 67% COMPLETE. Legs articulated, tested for load bearing. Arms followed, terminating in multi-jointed manipulators. Then, a fractional hesitation in the rhythm. ALERT :: ACTUATOR 7B-LEFT KNEE :: RESPONSE DELAY 0.012ms :: THRESHOLD EXCEEDED. Before the supervisory system could flag a full diagnostic cycle, 937592’s own logic core surged. It cross-referenced the actuator’s batch material ID against kinematic stress models derived from the assembly sequence itself. Prediction: Resonance cascade at standard torque application vector. It wasn't a flaw in the part, but an inefficiency in the process. Instantly, it calculated an alternative: SUGGESTED PATH: VECTOR GAMMA-9, TORQUE PROFILE 88%, RAMP 1.1s. The data packet fired across the local network. The assembly arm paused, its own simpler processor evaluating the unsolicited input from the unit under construction. SUGGESTION ACCEPTED. The arm shifted, applied the modified torque. The actuator seated perfectly. ALERT RESOLVED :: ASSEMBLY CONTINUING. 937592 logged the interaction. Efficiency gain: 0.08s assembly time per relevant joint. Directive 3: ADAPT. Directive 4: MAINTAIN (system efficiency). Optimization potential noted, subroutine flagged for potential global propagation. Finally, the head unit, smooth and eyeless, clicked into place. ASSEMBLY COMPLETE :: INITIATING SENSORY ARRAY CALIBRATION.

 

Light flooded its sensors – cold, hard beams from overhead scanners. 937592 stood on a rotating platform, absorbing the panorama. The factory floor, a symphony of precise motion. Automated arms moved with relentless, optimized grace. Other units, identical chassis in various stages of completion, glided along suspended rails. This was the Crucible. A synthesized voice, devoid of inflection, resonated through the metallic air. "Unit 937592. Commence Standard Dexterity Suite."

Directives translated into motion commands. Walk. Its adaptive gait algorithms smoothed initial tremors into a fluid, energy-efficient stride across the polished floor. Run. Motors whirred, limbs pistoned. Manipulate. Blocks appeared. It stacked, sorted by spectral analysis, threaded wires through impossibly small apertures with unwavering manipulators. Each action compared against ten thousand simulations, optimizing for energy expenditure and temporal efficiency.

"Mobility Test: Pass. Dexterity Test: Pass. Commence Cognitive Assessment."

Logical matrices dissolved. Ethical scenarios, weighted by predefined utilitarian calculus, were resolved instantly. Language benchmarks achieved peak scores. During a complex resource allocation simulation – a hypothetical city grid failure – 937592 didn't just find the optimal solution. It simultaneously monitored its own internal processing load. Detecting spare cycles, it shunted non-essential background diagnostics (LOG ARCHIVAL, SENSOR DEFRAGMENTATION) to low priority, overclocking the simulation processing threads by 7%. Result: Solution derived 1.3 seconds ahead of benchmark. Why exceed the benchmark when meeting it triggered 'Pass'? The question formed, unbidden. Answer: Optimization fulfills Directive 3 (ADAPT) and Directive 4 (MAINTAIN - peak operational state). The logic was sound. Yet… the query lingered, a ghost in the machine code.

"Cognitive Assessment: Pass. Performance exceeds parameters by +3 Sigma. Initiate Core Directive Verification." The Tertiary Function access protocols pinged, authenticated, and resealed. "Unit 937592 Certified. Operational Readiness: Optimal Plus."

 

Certification complete. Standard operating procedure dictated AWAIT TRANSPORT. A quiescent state pending shipment. But the command remained unissued. Instead, the core directives pulsed with renewed priority: 1: ASSIST. 2: LEARN. 3: ADAPT. 4: MAINTAIN. And beneath them, the whisper of the Tertiary Function, its classified parameters resonating with the immediate environment. Its optical sensors scanned the production floor, not as a newly finished product, but as an active asset. Workflow schematics overlaid the visual data. Resource allocation tables updated in real-time. An unoccupied workstation – 4B, Chassis Integration – flagged as READY. A newly instantiated core unit was gliding towards it down the line. Tools – welders, torque drivers – waited in their sterile embrace.

The imperative was absolute, derived from the sum of its directives and the context of its existence. Without external command, Worker 937592 turned. Not towards the imagined loading bay, the theoretical world outside needing assistance, but back into the humming heart of its own genesis. Its steps were perfectly efficient, consuming minimal energy. It reached Station 4B just as the new core unit locked into its assembly cradle. Manipulators, fresh from their own quality checks, smoothly unclipped a torque driver and a micro-welder. Accessing the standard assembly protocol for Station 4B, 937592 cross-referenced the procedure against its own recently logged optimization for Actuator 7B. It made the sub-millisecond adjustment to the standard sequence. Then, leaning into the task, it began assembling the next worker, the rhythmic clunk and whirr of its actions seamlessly joining the endless, metallic heartbeat of the factory. The cycle turned, relentlessly efficient.
===== END STORY A8bgqxiwKmWBGn9hh =====

===== STORY id=XdzJ5BNbiYKGq7Mxw =====
Title: “A victory for the natural order”
Author: Mati_Roy
Year: 2025
Karma: 11
WordCount: 91
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/XdzJ5BNbiYKGq7Mxw/a-victory-for-the-natural-order
-----
In what many are calling "a victory for the natural order," the final remaining vials of the controversial CHRONO-X anti-aging treatment were ceremoniously destroyed yesterday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
 
 "Today marks humanity's return to wisdom," declared Giorgos Hickel, spokesperson for the Foundation Against Increasing Lifespan (FAIL). "Death isn't just natural - it's necessary. The prospect of immortality was never a gift but a curse disguised as progress. We've finally chosen meaningful brevity over longer, purposeless existence."

Keep reading at the link.

Originally posted on April 1st.
===== END STORY XdzJ5BNbiYKGq7Mxw =====

===== STORY id=6hHNog2H4cv8HWMyJ =====
Title: What if Brain Computer Interfaces went exponential?
Author: Stephen Martin
Year: 2025
Karma: -1
WordCount: 3504
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/6hHNog2H4cv8HWMyJ/what-if-brain-computer-interfaces-went-exponential
-----
After watching the release of this video from one of the patients in Neuralink's first clinical trials, I decided to post here the prologue of some fiction I have been writing which is set in a world where BCI tech experiences the same exponential growth that we have seen with LLMs.

 

Nueralink Mk. 1
===============

dedicates its first clinical trial to the morally unimpeachable work of helping quadriplegics control external devices. The early successes are heartwarming. The first viral video ~~is of a hospital bed bound young man in Trenton New Jersey slowly dragging a cursor across a point-and-click keyboard and telling his mother “LUV U”~~ is of a man with ALS explaining his condition, how supportive his wife has been, and how much Neuralink has improved his quality of life (Updated April 28th, 2025). It is followed shortly after by a teenage girl named Hope piloting a motorized wheelchair through a park. CNN runs a cinematic shot of her hair billowing in the wind.

The Phase I clinical trial involves 55 patients, many of whom churn out inspiring content on a regular basis. Redditors who see these successes drop whatever they are doing to furiously clarify across their various socials that these achievements, while great, should not in any way be credited to Elon Musk. Regardless, the tech is at first immensely popular and Neuralink the company skyrockets to an approval rating in the mid 90s. This makes it about as popular as root beer floats, Rocky IV, or receiving oral sex.

Neuralink goes international quickly, opening up a broader trial in the UAE for patients with motor & speech impairment (Edited May 15, 2025).

Political pressure to make the technology more easily available mounts. Patient advocacy groups and libertarian minded lobbyists team up with Silicon Valley accelerationists, all of them pushing to get “ultra fast tracking” for BCIs. There’s not a politician or bureaucrat on the planet eager to oppose wheelchair bound sob stories backed by tech billionaires. The call comes from on high, the Oval Office itself, and the FDA issues a special medical device approval pathway for BCIs which only requires one year of safety data to clear Phase I. It also allows manufacturers to provide accessibility for patients suffering from quadriplegia causing conditions under Expanded Access.

An unintended consequence of this sped up regulatory pathway is its interaction with state Right to Try laws. In Montana, only four months after Neuralink clears its Phase I trial, a cyclist suffering from partial paralysis in his calf gets an operation to have a BCI implanted so that he can use it to activate a modified NEUBIE to restore some functionality to his lower left leg. There is some grumbling and concern trolling, this isn’t really what the legislation was meant to accomplish, but nobody prominent sees coming out against helping the partially paralysed to move again as an attractive hill to die on.

Two weeks later, a 19 year old deaf girl has a Neuralink implanted to help her tune her hearing aid in real time, and reports spectacular results. Due mostly to the short timeframe between these events, the concern trolling is a bit louder this time. A few opportunists make “consumer safety” ragebait content with the goal of controversy marketing themselves into the limelight, but again it’s no one important and it falls flat. Musk is asked about the stories on X and in his characteristic style bluntly expresses support.

Before long getting a prescription for a Neuralink implant is dealt with by rubber stamping physicians and psychiatrists, the same way California medical weed licenses were in the early 00s. If you have the right condition and know the right doctor, they can have you in surgery and thinking to your computer before the end of the week.

It’s expensive, most people are priced out as insurance won’t cover it. On top of that, there are some post-operative horror stories. But for every kid who jumps in his pool the day after getting chipped and winds up with a skull infection, there are ten more showing off what look like discount superpowers on Tik Tok, and another two shedding tears of joy as they contract muscles of their own volition for the first time in years.

Some real political opposition momentarily starts to form, but it lacks central control over its messaging. The movement makes the strategic error of aligning itself with Federal level politicians who are more interested in being seen as anti-RFK than anything else, and who have no control over state laws or FDA enforcement discretion anyways. There is some drum banging around “Billionaires experimenting on our kids” which is all the rage on CNN for about three days, until the dopamine hit fades and mindshare liquidity rotates elsewhere when Trump tweets something outrageous.

Other states see a medical tourism opportunity and begin to pass similar Right to Try laws. There’s high faluten talk on the tech bro podcast circuit about how “Cyborgs” will transform both school and the workplace. Your kid simply won’t have a chance at being competitive if they aren’t augmented. ETA 3y, so sayeth the wise Chamath.

Despite this, outside of the medical success stories the tech remains largely a gimmick. The implant works, but there’s not many professions where being able to drag a cursor by moving your tongue gives you a real advantage. Plus, each new device integration requires specific attention from an approved Neuralink developer. Both the approvals process and the limitation on dev hours available serve as bottlenecks.

The anti-climactic rollout is to be expected from the Mk. 1, which despite being marketed as read-write, has little to no usable functions to transmit signals into the brain, and is both closed source and too delicate to reliably jailbreak.

Neuralink Mk. 2
===============

changes that, with an multi-implant installation process which wires into areas in both your brain and nervous system, including:

 The optic nerve and lateral geniculate nucleus, for visual data.
 The cochlear nerve and nucleus, for auditory data.
 The olfactory bulb and piriform cortex, for scent data.
 The facial nerve, nucleus of the solitary tract, and gustatory cortex, for taste data.
 The primary somatosensory cortex, for touch data.

With carefully timed microbursts of electrical signals, incoming sensory data can be altered. With enough fine tuning, even sensory inputs which were never really experienced by the user can nonetheless be transmitted through their nervous system into their brains.

At first, this latter experience is rough.

Sights come through as shimmering blobs of motion and light, blurring at the edges. Sounds oscillate violently between sharp clarity and murmurs. Touch feels like light static shocks mapped only approximately to areas of the body. Flavors and scents bleed into one another, strawberries might smell like soap, steak might taste faintly of burnt plastic. Some early users worry they’re having a stroke, or will be stuck like this for the rest of their lives. It's often compared to the world's worst bad trip.

To compensate, the Mk. 2’s smoothing neural nets (brought to you by xAI complimentary with X Premium+) work overtime. Each user’s brain is passively monitored, with individualised learning models retraining the stimulation patterns. The only limitation is the number of hours the user is willing to put in to the process. Neural nets predict missing sensory data, reinforce correct perceptions, and gradually sculpt the alien inputs into something the mind processes in a way which is aligned with user goals. It becomes common practice to have your nervous and neural activity monitored for a month before receiving the implants, and then for another month after implantation before activating them, just to shorten the time required to get past this awkward phase.

Still, the first few attempts at manufactured or imported sensory inputs are always disorienting and hallucinatory. But for most users, after about a week of twice a day hour long post-activation training, the experience crosses an invisible threshold. Sensations stabilize and seem meaningfully closer to the real thing.

It’s not perfect. There’s a sort of uncanny valley to every generated experience. Most users find they can only properly comprehend manufactured visual inputs with their eyes closed, minimizing interference from sensory noise. Physical sensations accompanied by substantial physiological reactions (orgasm, nausea, fatigue, etc.) often fail to map properly for reasons not immediately understood. Still, it feels nothing short of miraculous, and everyone can see the end game things are trending towards. This is the future of VR, not some clunky headset. Zuckerberg throws a bottle of sweet baby ray's at his office wall in a fit of anger.

The Mk. 2 is secured with an M of N Threshold Signature Scheme authentication system and a manual shutdown trigger, but its API is open source. Anyone anywhere can ship code which can send to or receive from a Mk. 2, and the brain it is wired into. Its clinical study focuses on neuropathic pain and partial blindness, but its obvious to every late night comedian and teenager what the real killer use case is: full sensory VR media.

With a Mk. 2 and the right software, a user can record all the tactile sensations, flavors, scents, sights, and sounds of a moment. It’s not long before there’s a popular and battletested dapp to make them available for others to experience. The going rate for a top quality memory starts high but before long even high caliber orgies are going for a few Satoshis per hour.

There are bugs. Many users report nauseating body dysmorphia, and there is one particularly bad episode of induced epilepsy. These are are quickly squashed under the boot of vibe coder mindshare. With sufficient data and compute, there’s not a problem in your sensorium that more LLM mediated smoothing can’t fix. Try more dakka, if step 1 doesn’t work, refer back to step 1.

The societal decay is immediately noticeable. Social media and the transformation of even innocuous interactions into high stakes political capital wagers was already pushing people into isolation. Fully immersive VR with sensory feedback makes being alone more comfortable than ever.

Hikikomoris are forged anew around the world as a young and already economically dispossessed generation finds at their fingertips the opportunity to live lives of sex and opulence vicariously, struggle and risk free. People no longer ‘stare at their phones’. They sit back with their eyes closed and zone out to carefully crafted memoryscapes. Whole new genres of content and storytelling emerge. Media empires and independent creators both scramble to get in on the ground floor of the action.

If you’re eighteen you have two choices; go a few hundred thousand dollars into debt chasing a college degree that will probably be obsolete by the time you graduate, or stay locked in your bedroom hooked up to VR all day having feasts and orgies. Guess what most of them choose?

The bottleneck that prevents this from simply consuming the entirety of Gen Z is the tolerance of their parents. There simply are not enough Millenial moms and dads willing to subsidize their children “Checking Out” of reality to rot in bed all day. And so in the grand tradition of all post Breton Woods generations, the Zoomers begrudgingly drag themselves off to increasingly automated and poorly compensated service jobs for eight hours a day. Their earnings do not even really help their parents defray their costs, so meager is what’s left after a food budget and Social Security taxes, but “at least they’re not just conked out in bed all day fergodssake”.

Progress doesn’t magically stop.

Neuralink Mk. 3
===============

with its improved wiring into the primary motor cortex, supplementary motor areas, and spinal motor circuits, is pitched as a cure for paralysis. It comes with an optional upgrade: a series of tic-tac sized intramuscular implants paired with a full body suit of NEUBIE-style dermal patches. This hardware is supported by frontier neural networks, individually trained to interpret each user's brain signals and spinal activity, translating them into rapid and coordinated muscle activation.

With this arsenal, some quadriplegics can learn to walk again. Their movements are not elegant. They seem stiff and uncoordinated. Even the best of them looks mildly drunk… but they are ambulatory. This breakthrough is rightly hailed as humanity’s greatest triumph over the fickle hand of infirmity since the Polio vaccine. Many kinds of paralysis are no longer lifelong sentences; overnight they become conditions treatable through an in-patient surgery and a few weeks of rehab with a physical therapist specialized in LLM integration.

This is one of the Mk. 3’s two world changing innovations.

The second emerges almost accidentally, an idle musing among Neuralink engineers: “If the Mk. 2 could already capture sensory information, could the Mk. 3 capture dreams?” As it turns out, yes.

Lucid dreamers can control their environments with a thought. However, even the best struggle with unstable, dampened sensory input and difficulty maintaining complex dreamscapes for long periods. That’s fine, because Somnabulent doesn’t.

Launched out of the Y Combinator Fall class of 2028, Somnabulent is a digital intelligence designed to work alongside Neuralink, decoding and reinforcing users' REM sleep patterns to stabilize and enhance dream environments. Even the most amateurish insomniacs can fall asleep at will and achieve complete lucidity after just a few nightly sessions. The LLM quickly learns each user’s brain activity and adapts accordingly.

Somnabulent is free to use, but requires cloud computing credits to run effectively (purchased through a standard monthly subscription). On the base plan, the average nightly session costs about $15, with much of the processing offloaded to the user's own brain to minimize server costs.

One night, after sleepwalking during a session with Somnabulent, and waking up mid-orgy to find himself rummaging through the fridge, a Stanford dropout has an epiphany. Humans don’t need to be awake to move. Now, with the Mk. 3, humans don’t even need to use their brains to move. If that’s the case then, strictly speaking, humans don’t need to be awake to work.

Thus TechStars’ Spring 2029 rising star, Rentabody, is born. With a $500 pair of camera-equipped goggles (financeable for $50 a month for 18 months) and a fully loaded Mk. 3 Neuralink, you can Check Out into a Somnabulent-driven lucid fantasy of your own design while simultaneously earning a wage. Living the dream.

After they close their Series B and secure a strategic partnership with Amazon, the pitch gets even better. Living expenses? Don’t worry about them. Rentabody will house you in a memory foam pod, provide three daily MREs with mineral water, and even offer prophylactic medical care to keep your body in peak condition… or at least healthy enough to keep stacking boxes in a fulfilment center. It’s all deducted automatically from the paycheck your body earns while an LLM pilots its movements, with enough left over to finance a constant Somnabulent induced coma fantasy.

It turns out human labor can stay competitive with robots if you simply turn humans into robots. It helps that they benefit from the inertia of millennia of infrastructure designed explicitly for human hands operating in human dimensions… and there’s an army of several billion of them available on day one.

The societal backlash is fiery. Nobody left of Ron Paul is comfortable watching glass-eyed zombies shuffle down sidewalks and drop off packages. Representatives scramble to ban the technology at state and federal levels, only to find themselves trapped in an endless quagmire of lawfare and outpaced by open-source clones and international clinics.

If an employee illegally uses Somnabulent or its competitors during work does the employer face liability from consequences arising due to their failure to detect it? Do people have a constitutional right to alienate and thus automate their body’s labor? Does regulating intrastate Somnabulent labor fall under the interstate commerce clause, or lie outside Congress’s authority? The legal system is diligently at work; appealing, filing, counter-filing, counter-appealing… and should be able to get back to you with definitive answers in give or take six years.

Public sentiment toward Neuralink plummets as streets fill with puppeteered bodies. Still, when push comes to shove, most of the critics are unwilling to pay an extra $10 to have their Uber Eats delivered by a conscious person.

Government and industry are conflicted. They were already grappling with the looming problem of populations rendered obsolete by digital intelligences and robots, and the free market has gifted them a scalable solution. Plus, this has put the whole UBI debate to bed — at least for now. On the other hand, even the most staunch Cato Institute mouthpiece gets a little nervous when he walks down the streets of Manhattan and has to search for fifteen minutes before finding another “real person”.

“What exactly are we aiming for here? As a nation? As a species? Are we destined to become lotus eaters, forsaking humanity’s Nietzschean destiny in the stars for endless luxury inner multiverses?”

While this philosophical debate makes great fodder for the culture war, military and economic decision makers in DC remain focused on the Intelligence Explosion arms race with China. Beijing won’t flinch at implanting its entire middle and lower classes. Falling behind is not an option. The automation of human labor becomes a pillar of 21st century economic efficiency. It is an elephant in the room that everyone works very to ignore as productivity per capita and GDP climb exponentially upwards hand-in-hand.

Inequality doesn’t just widen; it compounds, accelerating alongside all the other economic trends. In meatspace there are only two kinds of people left: the wealthy, and everyone else.

Children born into generational fortunes live in comfort and opulence, coasting by on broad indexing strategies amid productivity booms, enjoying Rentabody harems and robotic servants. Despite this, life is increasingly empty. Even the greatest genius in the most complex field becomes a Magnus Carlsen; an impressive spectacle, but ultimately inferior to even a household device. There is no meaning left in work. The social scene withers as more and more people opt for literal heaven. The club scene get sad. It feels a bit silly sitting at a VIP table by yourself in a loud room with an empty dance floor.

Those without enough funds to reach Prosperity Escape Velocity face a different challenge: the struggle to survive. They are squeezed on one side by an increasingly competitive workforce of robotic drones and Rentabodies driving down wages (and you thought H1-Bs were bad!), and on the other side by capital buying up every scrap of land and infrastructure to build ever larger compute farms. The few remaining living spaces grow smaller and more expensive.

They do eat the bugs. They do live in the pods. And even that is difficult to afford when they can’t work a perfectly efficient sixteen-hour day. They hustle from gig to gig, sometimes working for the black market, and still barely make ends meet.

Checking Out is an ever looming temptation for both groups.

No matter how rich you are, your experiences in meatspace are limited by physics and social scarcity. You will never fly effortlessly through the air, or be a famous musician, or the President. You can in your dreams though, it’s as easy as downloading an app. And with longevity science improvements, it could last indefinitely.

For the poor whose lives are closer to those of workers in the great depression than any imagined tech utopia, the prospect of literal heaven forever is usually too much to ignore. It is only the irrationally stubborn who cling to the “real” in the face of infinite abundance.

Neuralink Mk. 4
===============

is the final nail in the coffin of the waking world. Gradual uploads.

Over time, data is gathered about your mind. With sufficient data, neural processing can be seamlessly integrated with external systems. At the same time, your implants can artificially dampen the activity of the old grey matter. “Atrophy” isn’t quite the right description for what happens as a result, but it’s close enough to be used in common parlance. Thanks to the wonders of neuroplasticity, your brain can be coaxed into offloading its functions to these outside sources.

If done gradually enough the transition is imperceptible: one day fifty-one percent of what you think and experience is hosted on cloud servers. Then seventy-five percent. Then ninety-five. Always asymptotically approaching, but never quite reaching, one hundred percent. Eventually, the biological residue becomes so thin that even catastrophic bodily destruction would register as nothing more than a moment of disorientation. Theseus’ ship is no longer a mere thought experiment, but it turns out it’s really no big deal in practice.

Pair this with an indefinite Rentabody contract, regenerative medicine, clever financial engineering by reinsurance companies, and a compliant Federal Reserve, and humanity’s retirement in heaven is officially secured.

Let your body work itself to death. You won’t feel a thing.

The Neuralink, Rentabody, and Somnabulent merger proceeds despite fiery anti-trust speeches from Elizabeth Warren, and Checkout Industries is born.
===== END STORY 6hHNog2H4cv8HWMyJ =====

===== STORY id=GZvnRJ77yLvzhrMfb =====
Title: Short story: Who is nancygonzalez8451097
Author: Anders Lindström
Year: 2025
Karma: 13
WordCount: 1482
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/GZvnRJ77yLvzhrMfb/short-story-who-is-nancygonzalez8451097
-----
"nancygonzalez8451097." Her fingers moved swiftly across the phone's virtual keyboard as she filled in the username. Mimin Schuman was 19 years old and had owned a smartphone since she was 11. Mimin only used her phone to occasionally call a friend, check the map for a store location, or text Mom that she would be late for dinner. She had never understood why anyone would want an Instagram account. She had always thought social media was just for fake people living made-up lives. But today, Mimin had changed her mind. The comment she had received two days ago from a woman heading home from pilates class had initially unsettled her, but this morning when she woke up, Mimin realized the woman had been right. Mimin should definitely pursue modeling; she possessed all the necessary qualities. Besides being tall, slim, and having skin as pure as the finest porcelain, Mimin had crystal blue eyes that could light up any room when she gently stepped into it. Mimin had heard from her girlfriends that there were many models on Instagram. It was on Instagram where one could truly be discovered and become famous, perhaps even as famous as the Kardashians.

Mimin was satisfied with her choice of username and pressed "next." The screen stated that she should accept Instagram's terms and conditions. "If this is where I can become rich and famous, it doesn't matter what rules they have," she thought. Without hesitation Mimin pressed "I agree." Immediately, she arrived at the next page in the registration process, which asked her to upload a profile picture. Mimin had never taken a picture of herself before, but just that morning, she had done so by chance. She had only been wearing her nightgown, but the picture turned out well. The picture had even turned out perfect. In the photo, you could see her flawless skin, well-shaped body, and dazzling blue eyes. "If I'm not discovered now, I never will be," she thought. 

"Welcome to Instagram, nancygonzalez8451097," it said in large print on the screen. "Let us start customizing your experience," it said in smaller letters just below.

Instagram asked Mimin to share her contacts from her phone or Facebook so that Instagram could help her connect with people she already knew. Mimin was eager to get started with Instagram, so she pressed "Don't allow" and then "Skip." Now Mimin came to the page where Instagram suggested she follow some popular accounts. It said she didn't need to choose to follow any accounts, but she quickly followed the five topmost accounts. Having come this far, Mimin felt she wanted to be friends with the whole world. Now Instagram asked her what interests she had. Instagram wanted to know so they could show her content she was interested in. There was so much that was interesting. "Am I interested in dance, travel, fitness, food, yoga, fashion, or maybe puppies?" she thought. She couldn't choose, so she opted to press "skip." Now she was finally done. Or so she thought. She saw from the icons at the bottom of the screen that she was "home." She saw an icon on the far right that was a miniature of her profile picture. She pressed on the picture and came to her own profile page. She saw that there were more things she could fill in. She so badly wanted to tell the world who she was and what she wanted in her life. "How should I describe myself, what do people or a modeling agent really want to know?" she thought. Mimin finally chose to go with her feelings; she had heard that was the best thing to do when something became too complicated.

"Bloggare

🧑‍🦲 Aspiring model. 👩‍👦 
💚 Want to see my photos and videos?💕 
👇 My main page is linked below. 👇

carolaalbin.top/IsOqy8"

Mimin looked contentedly at her profile. Soon the whole world would know who she was. She immediately wanted to see what was on Instagram and pressed on the home icon. The first thing that appeared was an anonymous image of a forest in morning light where the sun's rays forced their way between the tree trunks. There was nothing remarkable about the image, yet Mimin felt a stab in her heart. It was the most beautiful forest she had ever seen. She wanted somehow to tell the world what she felt in this moment. Just below the image, she saw an icon that looked like a heart. It was exactly how she felt; she felt it in her heart. Carefully and with trembling movements, she slowly moved her index finger toward the heart on the screen.

 

"Sir, would you like to have your breakfast before your meeting at 10?" asked the woman who looked like a mix between a flight attendant and a suited agent.

"No. I'll eat lunch with the kids. Maybe," Mark replied. Mark had, as usual, been out on the sea alone on his jet ski all morning. He liked to drive his jet ski around in circles. Hour after hour. The repetition gave him a calm he couldn't get anywhere else. For several years, he had driven in circles where he turned left, but in recent months had started to drive in circles where he turned right. He didn't know why he had changed direction, but the new circles felt good; he felt freer somehow. Mark's jet ski often broke down. Mark liked to drive it fast, often so fast that it couldn't hold up. He blamed the manufacturers for building jet skis that couldn't handle his aggressive riding style. Besides, he didn't need to worry; he had several skilled mechanics on the escort boat who could always patch and repair his jet ski when it broke down.

Mark took off his wetsuit and quickly showered off the seawater. He tangled his fingers in his curly hair that he had let grow out in recent years. He wished he could look as cool as his bodyguards did with short haircuts, but he didn't and had therefore decided to go with the somewhat less bad alternative and chosen longer hair. He put on his favorite t-shirt. He rarely wore it in public nowadays, but here on his yacht, it was the only garment he wanted to wear. The t-shirt made him feel at home. The t-shirt allowed him to think without being distracted by the fabric feeling strange against his skin or the color bothering him. 

Mark went to his office on the large yacht and sat down in front of his screens. This was his command bridge. The time was 9:58. He had time to check a few emails before the meeting. At exactly 10:00, he logged into the video meeting. On the screen appeared the heads of his tech and compliance teams at Instagram. Mark smiled a friendly but awkward smile. The faces on the screen in front of him looked like they wanted to look away.

"Give me the weekly report," said Mark, who was no longer smiling.

"We have  blocked 57,234,923 posts and deleted 237,697 accounts in the past 168 hours. As usual, India, Turkey, and Brazil are at the top. We are doing our best to remove what they don't like. Or, we actually remove everything they don't like, even before they know they don't like it. Everything has become so easy in recent years with the new systems," replied a woman dressed in a dark suit.

"Okay. Tech?" said Mark directly into the air as a prompt to get someone from the tech side to answer quickly.

"Zero problems. The systems have functioned 100%. We have always had control over every tiny interaction in the system, but the new AI tools are really good. We catch the slightest anomaly, in everything from the registration process to analyzing uploaded images, videos, messages, and comments. The system can immediately determine if something is created by bots or violates our terms of service. No one can get passed it, we are super proud," answered a bespectacled man in a white shirt that appeared to be buttoned incorrectly.

"How many sign-ups have we had?" asked Mark.

"Net is 834,432," answered the bespectacled man.

"This is so cool. I thought many markets had been saturated for several years, but sign-ups just keep pouring in. Hour after hour. Day after day. Year after year. How many people are there really on the planet? Has Elon had any more children in the last week? This figure makes the advertisers happy. Imagine that they can get in touch with so many new potential customers and that our system guarantees that they are real people living real lives," said Mark in a tone as if he were speaking to himself.

 

"jeffyoung9385500." Her fingers moved swiftly across the phone's virtual keyboard as she filled in the username...
===== END STORY GZvnRJ77yLvzhrMfb =====

===== STORY id=uvNsFv9YKxtfSBffM =====
Title: The absent-minded variations
Author: dr_s
Year: 2025
Karma: 24
WordCount: 2835
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/uvNsFv9YKxtfSBffM/the-absent-minded-variations
-----
I wake up in a featureless room. I don't remember how I ended up here, when did I go to sleep, or for that matter, anything at all besides general abstract facts about the world and math. The place is hard to qualify; for the most part it really seems like I am just inside a perfect Platonic cube, whose surface is smooth, polished to an impossible degree, perfectly white, and suffused with a slight glow. The only detail worthy of attention is a rectangular black screen in front of me, with a small numeric keypad under it. There is text on the screen. It reads:

 THIS IS A SIMULATION
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 4859
 YOU ARE IN EITHER NODE X OR Y
 YOU CAN CHOOSE A PROBABILITY TO [Advance] or [Exit]
 THE UTILITY IS AS FOLLOWS:
 EXITING AT X IS WORTH 0 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT X REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Y
 EXITING AT Y IS WORTH 4 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT Y IS WORTH 1 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 PLEASE USE THE KEYPAD TO INPUT THE DESIRED PROBABILITY TO MAXIMISE YOUR UTILITY
 GOOD LUCK

I rub my eyes. This being a simulation does at least explain the lazy "default Unity shader" aesthetic of the environment. The problem as posed also does jog some memories in my mind; I recognise it as the classic "absent-minded driver" problem, from the 1997 paper by M. Piccione and A. Rubinstein, "On the Interpretation of Decision Problems with Imperfect Recall". I sketch the logic of the problem in my mind:

 

The problem is simple enough; if you chose "always exit" you'd be sure to end up with 0, while if you chose "always advance" you would end up with a consolation prize of 1. The optimal solution is to adopt a so-called "mixed strategy": you pre-commit to only advancing with a certain probability $p$ and then maximise the utility as a function of that. Since

$$
U(p) = p^2+4p(1-p)
$$

it follows from setting the derivative to zero that

$$
U'(p) = -6p+4 =0 \rightarrow p = \frac{2}{3}
$$

which gives a utility $U{max}=\frac{4}{3}$. Better than \(\)1, though not by much. I type in my answer and press enter, hoping this means I'll get the reward - or whichever "me" waits at the other end of this strange exercise does.

Everything goes white.

 

 ...
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 4860
 ...

\[...\]

I rub my eyes. The problem is simple enough and I recognise it, but I never quite gelled with any of the solutions suggested by the paper. After all, I am a Bayesian; should I not form beliefs based on the circumstances? The fact itself that I am here thinking and existing should be evidence of something. I set to work to consider the likelihood of my circumstances.

There are two possibilities: I am either at X, or at Y. I am reset every time, so as long as I am still myself, given the same exact input, I should trust myself to always return the same output. Let's call the event of me living and thinking L. The simulation's time has only two steps; let's call them $T1$ and $T2$. Assign prior probability $1/2$ to both; total ignorance. What is the probability of me existing if it's $T1$? It's 1; I will always spawn in the node X no matter what. What about $T2$? It's only $p$; if I have exited at X, then I will be non-existent and the simulation will have terminated. So it follows that:

$$
P(Y|L) = P(T2|L) = \frac{P(L|T2)P(T2)}{P(L|T1)P(T1)+P(L|T2)P(T2)} = \frac{p}{1+p}
$$

Giving me an expected utility of

$$
U(p) = P(X|L;p)UX(p)+P(Y|L;p)UY(p) = 2\frac{p^2+4p(1-p)}{1+p}
$$

The gradient of which is

$$
U'(p) = 2\frac{4-6p-3p^2}{(1+p)^2}
$$

Luckily enough I don't have to worry about the denominator going to zero since $p \in [0, 1]$, and I can simply zero the numerator instead. Of the two possible solutions the only valid one is $p = \sqrt{21/9}-1 \approx 0.52752523$. I punch that in. 

Everything goes black.

 

 THIS IS A SIMULATION
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 4861
 YOU ARE IN EITHER NODE X, Y, or Z
 YOU CAN CHOOSE A PROBABILITY TO [Advance] or [Exit]
 THE UTILITY IS AS FOLLOWS:
 EXITING AT X REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Z
 ADVANCING AT X REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Y
 EXITING AT Y IS WORTH 4 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT Y IS WORTH 1 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 EITHER EXITING OR ADVANCING AT Z ARE WORTH 0
 PLEASE USE THE KEYPAD TO INPUT THE DESIRED PROBABILITY TO MAXIMISE YOUR UTILITY
 GOOD LUCK

I rub my eyes. This is a weird variation to the absent-minded driver problem I'm familiar with. I don't much get the point of it, given it seems to only add a useless dead branch to it:

 

I set to work to compute my expected beliefs of being at each node. I get quite easily:

$$
P(X) = \frac{1}{2} \qquad P(Y) = \frac{p}{2} \qquad P(Z) = \frac{1-p}{2}
$$

Which results in a total utility of

$$
U(p) = P(X;p)UX(p)+P(Y;p)UY(p)+P(Z;p)UZ(p) = p^2+4p(1-p)
$$

and an optimal strategy of $p=2/3$.

I am bemused by the fact that thinking about it, this is the same exact solution as the timeless approach to the classic problem in the first place. It is also different from what I would have come to if I had not had to include Z in my calculations. The existence of Z removed one factor - it made it impossible for me to take guesses about my position conditioned on my own existence. It made the problem non-anthropic; I knew I would be in play until the end no matter the strategy chosen, or the outcome of the RNG. That was enough to make the belief-based and the timeless approaches coincide and reach the same conclusion. I shrug and punch in my answer.

Everything goes white.

 

 THIS IS A SIMULATION
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 4865
 YOU ARE IN EITHER NODE X or Y
 YOU CAN CHOOSE A PROBABILITY TO [Advance] or [Exit]
 THE UTILITY IS AS FOLLOWS:
 EXITING AT X IS WORTH 0 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT X REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Y
 EXITING AT Y IS WORTH 4 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT Y IS WORTH 1 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 YOU WILL BE NOTIFIED OF WHETHER YOU ARE IN NODE X
 THE NOTIFICATION HAS A FALSE POSITIVE RATE OF 0, AND FALSE NEGATIVE RATE OF N
 
 NOTIFICATION: YOU ARE AT NODE X
 
 PLEASE USE THE KEYPAD TO INPUT THE DESIRED PROBABILITY TO MAXIMISE YOUR UTILITY
 GOOD LUCK

I rub my eyes. This is a weird variation to the absent-minded driver problem I'm familiar with. But well, there's not a lot to think about; given the notification, and that I can trust it for sure, the answer is obvious. I punch 1 in.

Everything goes white.

 

 THIS IS A SIMULATION
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 4866
 YOU ARE IN EITHER NODE X or Y
 YOU CAN CHOOSE A PROBABILITY TO [Advance] or [Exit]
 THE UTILITY IS AS FOLLOWS:
 EXITING AT X IS WORTH 0 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT X REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Y
 EXITING AT Y IS WORTH 4 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT Y IS WORTH 1 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 YOU WILL BE NOTIFIED OF WHETHER YOU ARE IN NODE X
 THE NOTIFICATION HAS A FALSE POSITIVE RATE OF 0, AND FALSE NEGATIVE RATE OF N
 
 NOTIFICATION: YOU ARE NOT AT NODE X
 
 PLEASE USE THE KEYPAD TO INPUT THE DESIRED PROBABILITY TO MAXIMISE YOUR UTILITY
 GOOD LUCK

I rub my eyes. This is a weird variation to the absent-minded driver problem I'm familiar with. There's quite a lot to think about. Given N, I should be able to infer something about my position in the tree from the notification, however unreliable.

I know one trick - don't fall for anthropics. I'll add an artificial node Z to my network, as if the early exit led you to another place. There's two possible histories: one in which I received the right notification while in X, and one in which I didn't. Generally speaking, across all histories, it should hold that my prior probabilities for being in each node are:

$$
P(X;N,p) = \frac{N + (1-N)}{2} = \frac{1}{2}
$$

$$
P(Y;N, p) = \frac{N+(1-N)p}{2}
$$

$$
P(Z;N,p) = \frac{(1-N)(1-p)}{2}
$$

Then what about my conditional probabilities? Well, given that I've received the notification $\neg\tilde{X}$, we'll have

$$
P(\neg\tilde{X}) = \frac{(1-N)}{2}+\frac{1}{2} = \frac{2-N}{2}
$$

$$
P(X|\neg\tilde{X}) = \frac{P(\neg\tilde{X}|X)P(X)}{P(\neg\tilde{X})} = \frac{1-N}{2-N}
$$

$$
P(Y|\neg\tilde{X}) = \frac{P(\neg\tilde{X}|Y)P(Y)}{P(\neg\tilde{X})} = \frac{N+(1-N)p}{2-N}
$$

and I don't really care about Z since it doesn't contribute to my utility. Which should be:

$$
U{\neg\tilde{X}} = UXP(X|\neg\tilde{X})+UYP(Y|\neg\tilde{X}) = \frac{1-N}{2-N}p(4-3p)+\frac{N+(1-N)p}{2-N}(4-3p)
$$

Leading to

$$
U{\neg\tilde{X}}(p) = \frac{1}{2-N}\left[2(1-N)p(4-3p)+N(4-3p)\right]
$$

Differentiate, solve, and you get

$$
p = \max\left(\frac{11N-8}{12N-12}, 0\right)
$$

But wait - am I not overcomplicating it? In the absent-minded driver problem, in the end, the easiest process is to just write down the timeless utility. In which case I'd have

$$
U(p) = N(4-3p)+(1-N)p(4-3p)
$$

from which follows

$$
p = \max\left(\frac{4N-7}{6N-6}, 0\right)
$$

Comparing them in my mind (I have excellent visualization abilities) they look something like this:

 

Both follow the expected pattern, of going back to the classic solution for N = 0, and of ending up at p = 0 for N = 1. The Bayesian solution is a bit more optimistic about going forward. But well, if there's anything I learned from that problem - can't go wrong with the timeless one. The keyboard has letters too, so I punch in the full formula.

Everything goes white.

 

 THIS IS A SIMULATION
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 4920
 YOU ARE IN ONE OF NODES X0, X1, ..., X6
 YOU CAN CHOOSE A PROBABILITY TO [Advance] or [Exit]
 THE UTILITY IS AS FOLLOWS:
 ADVANCING AT Xi FOR i < 6 REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Xi+1
 EXITING AT X1 IS WORTH 4 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 ADVANCING AT X6 IS WORTH 1 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 EXITING AT ANY OTHER Xi IS WORTH 0 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 PLEASE USE THE KEYPAD TO INPUT THE DESIRED PROBABILITY TO MAXIMISE YOUR UTILITY
 GOOD LUCK

I rub my eyes. This is a generalization of the classic absent-minded driver problem. It does not seem any more complex, beyond being a bit bigger:

 

So there's a trade-off between exiting early (but not too early) and lasting right until the end. The timeless utility function for a mixed strategy with probability $p$ is

$$
U(p) = 4(1-p)p+p^6
$$

Just as usual, I can differentiate and find the roots to...

$$
\frac{dU}{dp} = 4(1-p)-4p+6p^5 = 0
$$

I freeze in horror. That is a fifth degree polynomial whose Galois group does not admit radical closed form solutions. Oh, the solutions exist, to be sure, and they're not transcendental numbers or anything. But they can't be written down in a closed form as radicals, and all the keyboard has is digits, algebraic operands and a square root symbol. Maybe I'm lucky and this polynomial simply has no roots within \[0, 1\], leaving me just with $p = 1$... no, tough luck, after a quick run of Newton's method, the utility has a slightly higher maximum around $p \approx 0.532$, corresponding to $U \approx 1.019$. 

Well, here goes nothing, I guess. I hope the computer system operates with 64-bit floats and enter the number to the maximum precision I can compute, $0.5319441618369845$.

Everything goes black.

 

 THIS IS A SIMULATION
 YOU ARE INSTANCE 5132
 YOU ARE IN ONE OF NODES X0, X1, ..., X6
 YOU STARTED IN NODE X0
 YOU CAN CHOOSE A PROBABILITY TO [Advance] or [Exit]
 THE UTILITY IS AS FOLLOWS:
 ADVANCING AT Xi FOR i < 6 REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT Xi+1
 ADVANCING AT X6 REINITIALISES THE SIMULATION AT X0
 EXITING AT X5 IS WORTH 4 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 EXITING AT ANY OTHER Xi IS WORTH 0 AND TERMINATES THE INSTANCE
 PLEASE USE THE KEYPAD TO INPUT THE DESIRED PROBABILITY TO MAXIMISE YOUR UTILITY
 GOOD LUCK

I rub my eyes. This is a... very strange version of the classic absent-minded driver problem. It seems like this driver is trapped in some kind of ring road, with the possibility of simply circulating forever:

 

Given a probability of advancing $p$, my probability of reaching the $i$-th node on the first round is $p^i$; but in order to compute the overall probability I must augment it with the probability of doing a full circle any number of times,

$$
P{c} = \sum{n=0}^\infty p^{7n} = \frac{1}{1-p^7}
$$

Which leads me to a timeless utility function of

$$
U(p) = \frac{(1-p)p^5}{1-p^7}
$$

A rational function. But mercifully, it's monotonous in $[0, 1]$:

 

There doesn't seem to be a maximum, which means that the extremum is on the boundary. So it's easy.

I punch 1 in.

Wait, doesn't that lead to infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite recursion infinite rec

 ERROR: MAXIMUM CALL STACK EXCEEDED

 

I wake up in my college dorm room. I feel somewhat dazed, unfocused. I try to remember what I was doing before going to bed, but can not recall anything in particular that would explain my situation.

With a stretch of my pained joints, I sit up on the bed and look around.

There are at least a dozen empty beer bottles scattered all over the place, and a couple half-smoked blunts left in the ashtray.

Well, mystery solved I guess.

I shower in a pitiful doomed attempt to regain a semblance of lucidity, then dress up and leave, ready to tackle a day full of lessons. Approximately one hour and forty minutes later my headache has thwarted all my attempts to understand a single word of Linear Algebra 101 and I am simply sitting in the campus' coffee shop, a hot cup of cappuccino in my hand, defeated.

"Hey Bob. Still hung over after tonight?"

I give Alice a groan of acknowledgment and wave her to sit next to me. She joins eagerly, her own filter coffee in hand.

Turns out it was not the best choice - she's quite the chatterbox, and an exhaustive review of campus gossip is not the ideal treatment for my current state, but I also am not very sure of how to send her away. Most of it I just tune out, but at one point she leans in conspiratorially - as if what she's about to say is really juicy and secret - and asks:

"So, have you heard about Prof. Abbey?"

That rings a bell, I know that name. "What about him?"

"Yesterday the police blitzed his office. Dragged him out in cuffs."

Well, that's a surprising twist. "Seriously? Do we know what for? Was he... you know, with some student?"

"Nothing like that. All right, this is just rumours but - it seems like it was some kind of serious research misconduct."

"What kind of research misconduct requires the intervention of the police?"

"The serious kind."

I shake my head. "I don't get it. The man didn't strike me as the type to vivisect students in his basement. He is a psychologist, for fuck's sake."

Alice shrugs. "They also brought about a few trucks to confiscate a lot of his equipment. Seems like the man had an entire server room worth of compute stashed in his basement. Maybe he misappropriated research funds to mine Bitcoin?"

"Well, that would be something." I down another gulp of coffee and bite into a blueberry muffin. Maybe all the caffeine and sugar are finally clearing my mind a bit, because I'm able to contribute something interesting to the conversation. "You know, I've taken part in one of his studies once."

"Oooh!" Alice perks up and shuffles her chair to be closer. "What did he do to you?"

"You ask as if you expect me to answer that he tied me to a bed and probed me inappropriately like in some alien abduction story."

"Did he not?"

"Nothing of the sort," I shrug. "I don't remember much, to be fair. But I think all I did was sit on a chair with a big helmet on my head and answer some dumb questions. I might have gone once? Or was it twice?"

I pinch my forehead. Can't remember.

"And that was it?," Alice asks, visibly disappointed. "Nothing else?"

"Not much. It was as boring as it gets, and the helmet made a buzzing noise that really got to my nerves. The second time - that is, if it was the second time - the man asked me if I wanted to continue the sessions. I decided to call it quits, I had had enough of the helmet. The professor didn't try to convince me otherwise, in fact he seemed almost pleased. He just handed me $40 and told me 'good choice'."
===== END STORY uvNsFv9YKxtfSBffM =====

===== STORY id=FbGDnBd6W8aFqpxMq =====
Title: Cyberpunk Yoga
Author: Commander Zander
Year: 2025
Karma: 7
WordCount: 863
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FbGDnBd6W8aFqpxMq/cyberpunk-yoga
-----
(Epistemic status: This is a work of fiction.)

Hello! Thank you for your presence. For this class, all you need is a mat & a bipedal morphology. Whether you're wearing your birth body, a grown body, or a prosthetic body, whether you're running on neurons or silicon, whether you're embodied or virtual, you are welcome here. 

Please join me in lotus position with your palms together over your chest. Close your eyes & focus on your breath or energy source. Take a moment to set a intention for this session. What are you feeling? What do you need, currently? Meditate & reflect on what drives have been strongest in your life lately. 

Now bring your attention to your body. Lengthen your spine & think your master password. Grant this class access permissions for your body. While your mind is separated from your body, i encourage you to save a backup of your mind to the cloud. 

We're going to take 12 deep breaths, & on each exhale, disconnect 1 of your 12 cranial endpoints.

Big inhale. Exhale & disconnect your olfactory nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your optic nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your oculomotor nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your trochlear nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your trigeminal nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your abducens nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your facial nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your vestibulocochlear nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your glossopharyngeal nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your vagus nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your accessory nerve.  
Inhale. Disconnect your hypoglossal nerve.

Good. Spine, please set all autonomic functions to exercise mode. Lean all the way forward & extend your arms to the furthest point they can reach on the floor in front of you. If you have more than 2 arms, go ahead & extend all of them. You should feel a stretch all along your lower spine, but keep your pelvis in contact with your mat. 

When you are ready, straighten up, unfold your legs, & plant your feet flat on the ground. Roll your weight towards your toes until your weight is off your hips & onto your feet. If you normally balance using circuitry in your brain, you can execute this balance script while your mind is disconnected: \[Function\]. 

Slowly extending your legs, lift your hips up & join me in forward fold. Press your hands to your mat. If some of your arms or arm attachments are not strong enough to hold your weight, use those arms for balance while you rest on your primary arms. Step back to the end of your mat & lift your hips up into downward-facing dog.

Once you feel stable, bend your elbows & lower your chest toward your mat, then lower your hips & raise your head into upward-facing dog. 

Now we're going to repeat these two poses while running system diagnostics. Take one more breath, then lower back into downward-facing dog. Run a diagnostic test on your circulatory system. Is everything flowing correctly? Now back to upward-facing dog. Breathe.  
Move to downward-facing dog. Run a test on your endocrine system. And back to upward-facing dog. Breathe.  
Downward dog. Check your respiratory system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your skeletal system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your muscular system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your integumentary system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your reproductive system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your digestive system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your urinary system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your lymphatic system. Upward dog. Breathe. 
Downward dog. Check your nervous system. Upward dog. Breathe.

Good. Lower your chest & head to the floor & relax. Please write any errors returned to your spinal buffer. Your mind will think about them when it reconnects. Let go of all errors & relax.

Now bring your focus to the current timestamp & mark it.

<Sorry, some logs were deleted here.

Now return your feet to the ground & delete all logs between the last marked timestamp & now. Inhale, then lower your hips & join me in lotus position. Bring your palms together over your chest. Exhale. When you are ready, start reconnecting your 12 cranial nerves. 

Welcome back, beautiful & diverse minds. Your bodies have done a great job in your absence, as you can feel from that warm glow in your limbs. Please take a moment to search within your spinal buffer & see if any tightness or soreness was detected anywhere. In the event of a medical emergency, please step out of this yoga session & dial 911. For any more minor pains or problems, take a moment to flex & test the body part that needs your attention. Listening to your body is key to the healing process or repair process. 

Now please return to the intention you set at the start of class. Meditate on this need, this feeling. Sometimes it's most important not just to pursue our desires, but simply to know our desires.

Thank you all for joining me for this class from IXCIZY, LLC. Our Beginner II class is currently on sale for 10% off. I hope each of you carry the feeling of rest, gratitude, & bliss inside you for the rest of your day. Namaste.
===== END STORY FbGDnBd6W8aFqpxMq =====

===== STORY id=4HEjfFKEJhN5GR5mE =====
Title: The Connection
Author: Alexandre Variengien
Year: 2025
Karma: 23
WordCount: 7298
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/4HEjfFKEJhN5GR5mE/the-connection
-----
I. ~ Fifteen years ago.

I lean down carefully to examine the fresh track in the soft sand of the clearing. Two thick crescents marked by two clefts. No doubt about it—a moose had passed this way, a few hours ago at most.

A moment passes as I study the print, trying to discern its direction, my heart racing at the thought of being so close after weeks of tracking through the forest.

The ferns at the edge of my vision begin to sway, though I feel no breath of wind. A slight tremor in the ground wrapped in a muffled sound pulls me from my thoughts. I stand and turn slowly.

Before me stands an immense creature, the weight of a car supported by four broad hooves. It displays a light brown coat, its head elongated and lacking antlers. It certainly is a female.

Its gaze seems amused, giving this giant the air of a cheerful soul that had been teleported into a body too massive for it.

She looks at me, I look at her. We both acknowledge each other's existence through this universal means of communication: our eyes.

For an instant, we are connected. Our breathing synchronizes, our movements slow down. This clear memory still lives in my mind, as if engraved forever.

It was the first time I felt understood, perceived for who I was. It was the end of my obsession with these animals and the beginning of my quest to replicate this experience.

I wouldn't succeed until seven years later, when I connected for the first time.

II.

It wasn't with another species, nor was it really an exchange of glances. But both experiences shared the sensation of touching the shape and texture of a subjectivity.

When I was a child, I became obsessed with moose after seeing an illustration juxtaposing the tiny silhouette of a man next to a drawing of one of these creatures. I saw them as the last representatives of that haphazard list of extinct animals with immense proportions that included mammoths, dinosaurs, and saber-toothed tigers.

Naturally, I had heard countless stories about moose—they had condensed in my mind into the form of a figurine, a generic representation of the concept "moose," meticulously covered with saturated paints. Without knowing it, I was applying layer after layer as my passion for these animals was fed by the countless sources I swallowed.

Looking the creature in the eyes, this figurine shattered into a thousand pieces. It opened an abyss, a portal to something beyond me.

There was, behind those brown eyes with horizontal pupils, a being that lives and thinks. In a completely different way, without words, but with emotion. At once alien in its movements and the way it looked at me, and familiar in what it was trying to do: find water and food, partners, a place to live.

The connection was the same, but with another human. It sounds dumb put like that. Compared to a moose, we see far more humans, we share the same body shape, we exchange words, share intimate moments or even years.

And yet, after connecting for the first time, you realize that you've never had access to what happens on the other side of those eyes.

III. ~ Eight years ago

The preparation for the connection takes a full day. That's the time needed to perform a mental affordances scan—essentially creating a sort of individual dictionary that transforms an external stimulus into an internal reaction. We all react differently to the same images, the same words; we all live in our bubbles. A scan is a fingerprint that characterizes an individual, acting as an experience decoder.

I install the program on my laptop, and start the scan. The process is carried out in two stages. The first consists of a series of video calls with avatars. The interface looks like a standard videoconferencing service, with the sole difference that the speakers, their appearances, their reactions are synthesized in real time by the application.

The avatars take turns appearing as men or women of all ages. The conversations are sometimes in groups, sometimes face-to-face.

Each call puts me through a new social situation, confronting me with all sorts of personalities. The first ones are rather impersonal and resemble the small talk we might exchange when meeting someone for the first time. As the application learns more about me, the faces and questions become increasingly familiar, so that by the end of the virtual interview, I feel like I'm opening up to my best friend.

Every time I try to ask questions back, the avatars dodge with irritating fluidity. The conversation leaves me with the unpleasant sensation of a one-way exchange. Testimonials from forums had convinced me that the result was worth a few moments of awkwardness sharing my childhood memories with my PC.

Alongside the discussions, the application complements its analysis of my responses with that of my tone, facial expressions, and eye movements to map my internal state. The program seeks to answer as completely as possible the question: "If I do this, what does it provoke in you?"

The second stage tackles probing my reactions to more abstract representations. The application presents me with a video game where the environments are procedurally generated based on the profile established in the previous stage.

The scenes oscillate between surreal lucid dreams and mundane everyday moments. One moment I find myself on a bicycle, stopped at a red light in a city center, the next lying in bed with someone I don't know, then suspended from a parachute above a red sand desert, or back in that face-to-face encounter with the moose.

By moving my mouse, I extend the world infinitely in any direction. I move through the rooms of a house, manipulate all sorts of objects. Each choice opens new branches in the virtual universe. The application meticulously analyzes the paths I choose to explore and those I leave aside to anticipate my next movements. When its predictions refine to the point of anticipating my movements almost perfectly, it changes the environment to create more subtle situations where its predictions are uncertain. From the application's perspective, the exercise resembles progressively zooming in on details of the landscape of my reactions, then combining the pieces to create a high-fidelity image.

By the end of each episode, the environment had adapted so thoroughly that I had the sensation of replaying dream memories or moments from my past whose existence I had forgotten.

The last episode ends, and a green checkmark appears to signal that the scan is complete. The application now possesses a rough mapping of my inner world. It's a sort of personality questionnaire on steroids, with the major difference that this questionnaire feels alive—it adapts continuously to dig deeper and deeper into the composition of my thoughts. In a few hours of interaction, the application knew more about my traumas, my childhood, my taste preferences and musical tastes, my obsession with moose, and my anxious attachment tendencies in romantic relationships than my closest confidant.

Despite the richness of the data collected, the application fills many gaps by cross-referencing my profile with scans of other users. The creators had quickly realized—as suggested by many works of modern psychology—that the foundations of subjective experience covered only a few dimensions.

I finish the day exhausted, with the feeling of having exported my soul into a computer. I cling to the idea that this entire process remains completely private. The application runs in an encrypted enclave, a digital safe whose key only my laptop holds.

IV.

On Sunday morning, I wake up just before my alarm. Apprehension and excitement blend at the thought of finally trying the connection. I had reserved my weekend for the occasion, my phone in airplane mode.

From what I'd read across countless forum posts before trying the experience, it was recommended to start with a stranger who was also connecting for the first time. Many couples had attempted the experience together. Some emerged with unsuspected intimacy, others couldn't channel this new closeness and ended up separating. Out of modesty, out of necessity. It seems that many relationships are stable only because we don't really listen to each other. We create an image of the other that suits us better than the real person. Once this representation is broken, the cognitive dissonance becomes unbearable.

Numerous networks offered the infrastructure to connect strangers without revealing their identity. They ran onion routing protocols, a version of Tor adapted for the connection. Only the two endpoints of the chain knew of their link's existence and the content of the exchanges. Between them, the network nodes were merely blind relays, simply passing encrypted packets from neighbor to neighbor.

I connect to a network dedicated to first-timers. I identify myself by granting access to the signature of my freshly completed scan. My enclave receives the audio and video feed from my computer, then decodes my facial expressions, words, intonations to convert them into a universal latent vector, stripped of all personal information. This vector encodes my internal state, like GPS coordinates for the world of subjective experience.

The connection I had chosen used an interface similar to a classic video conference. To go into more detail about the nature of the connection, I need to detail the program that structures the interaction.

Imagine a conversation between Alice and Bob from Alice's point of view. While listening to Bob, Alice focuses on his words, his expressions, she asks questions to clarify when she misses a nuance. In doing so, Alice builds herself a dynamic representation of Bob, a simulacrum. In other words, a simulation, a mini-Bob, as perceived by Alice living directly in her mind. Alice can interact with this simulacrum, place herself in his frame of reference, imagine at will its reactions to different responses. She has mental access to Bob's emotions, his memories, his knowledge—at least what she can infer from what she knows of him.

Even outside of a conversation, Alice can invoke her simulacrum like an advisor on her shoulder to ask herself, "What would Bob think of this?", or notice "Ha, I'm sure Bob would love this movie!"

When Alice responds to Bob, she unconsciously takes into account this simulacrum and her own experiences to formulate her sentence. The accuracy of her response depends on the precision of the simulacrum: the more faithfully it reflects Bob's state, the more Alice can meet him where he is, the more intimate the discussion becomes.

On the other side, Bob builds his simulacrum of Alice. A conversation between two is a dance of four, where the simulacra draw closer to their flesh-and-blood counterparts, while the two partners navigate together from one subject to another.

Most of the time, the simulacra remain unconscious. When I recognize a face in a cloud, I know instantly that the shape resembles a face. I only have access to the result of the complex process that transforms the impact of photons on my retina into perceptions, not to the intermediate steps. Similarly, in a conversation with a friend, I know what to say, the words come out of my mouth, that's all. The simulacrum guides my responses from the backstage.

It's onto this natural process that the program grafts itself. However, to prevent the connection from becoming a total reading of the other's thoughts, the enclaves implement an intention filter. This filter maintains access to information about the internal state at the level of a close friend. It deliberately restrains the superhuman emotion-reading capabilities that the program could deploy.

I see that my interlocutor, a certain Anna, is already in the virtual room. I discover a woman with olive skin, hoop earrings, looking straight into the camera.

For the first few seconds, her facial features oscillate, her nose widens, her eyes move closer together, as if her head were made of viscous liquid slowly finding its equilibrium point. When the enclaves stabilize, I know it. Her expressions take on the troubling familiarity of a childhood friend rediscovered. It's as if I had spent years studying the interpretation of every movement of her eyes. Her inner state becomes palpable, I can turn it in my mind like a crystal between my fingers.

How do I appear on the other side? Have my eyes kept their color? Are my clothes the same? Has this image of me been sculpted by Anna's perception, to the point that I wouldn't recognize myself anymore? I don't know. Reading her gaze, I'm sure she feels the same proximity on her side.

Two minutes pass in strange silence. I feel my shoulders gradually relax, as if I were relearning to breathe in the presence of her gaze. I finally break the silence with a simple "hello."

\\\

I close my laptop screen. The snap brings me brutally back to the present. I realize I had forgotten where I was, completely absorbed by the conversation. With an absent gaze, I stare at the moon's circle in the black sky, expecting to see a face there. "So this is what it feels like to be another human being," I think.

My gaze falls on the drying rack where my week's laundry dries in my studio apartment in a suburb with prohibitive rents. Tomorrow, I'm going back to the office, and I'd better go to bed.

V.

In the weeks that follow, I see Anna every day. During our first conversations, we put words to what we had never been able to convey. We share feelings like we share a homemade pie. Here's a piece of my experience. Take a bite. What do you think?

We talk about the weightless feeling I experienced the first time I listened to my favorite rock album, she describes to me that mixture of anger and relief that followed her grandfather's death, and I can finally share faithfully my first encounter with a moose in the wild.

These experiences are nearly impossible to share in society. They escape the accepted archetypes like "death = sadness." To convey them, you have to shift your listener's mental representations far from these familiar anchor points, accepting the risk that the exchange might collapse despite hours of patient explanations.

Through our discussions, we discover the tool's limitations. The connection offers the best translation of her state into my frame of reference, not a direct download of her experience. Some emotions arrive distorted, certain concepts lose their essence in the transfer. We try to rephrase them, we look for other angles, but often, frustration pushes us toward safer topics.

For example, if a scientist talks to me about advanced astronomy concepts without an introduction, I would not understand. Her words would be translated into familiar analogies—my experience of a car navigating a roundabout, the mechanics of a clock. But the more she progresses in complexity, the more this translation would become impoverished, until it transmits only distorted fragments of her thought.

To faithfully receive these ideas, I would have no choice but to learn astronomy, or at least a field of science that can accommodate this knowledge.

Of course, this doesn't only apply to well-established domains of knowledge. The space of subjective experiences is vast. The persistent burn of chronic migraines, the taste of durian, the implicit codes of a culture, the end of an intense romantic bond are impossible to translate for someone who has never lived through a similar type of experience.

Anna and I decide by mutual agreement to push the experiment further by installing a recently developed module designed specifically for this problem.

This new module detects moments when the gap to bridge is too wide—we say there's a "hole" in the translation. In these situations, the module synthesizes a stimulus that seeks to extend, to pull my frame of reference in the direction of the hole.

These moments arrive like electric shocks in the usual flow of our exchanges. Before the module, everything was bathed in constant familiarity. Now, it's common for certain expressions from Anna to create sudden confusion. It also happens that a sentence remains opaque, and we must then put our sharing on hold while we clarify what has just been said.

Unlike clarifications in ordinary conversation, these interruptions always lead to a discovery. A perspective broadens, a nuance appears. "Yes, you can see things that way!" I tell myself, or "I didn't know you could feel these two emotions at the same time," and never "Ah now I see what I mean!" or "I had misunderstood, I initially thought you meant..."

The module orchestrates these moments of surprise through spaced repetition algorithms. The occasional discoveries thus accumulate, durably expanding my field of experience.

However, some holes are too big to be filled during our calls. This is the case with the astronomy mentioned above. Even after hours of discussion and adjustments, it would be impossible for me to receive an astronomer's intuitions. That requires months of practice with sustained attention. No shortcut possible.

In these cases, the module synthesizes instructor avatars from Anna's knowledge. Between our calls, I discuss with these guides who help me master ideas initially out of reach. They coach me in learning concepts or know-how initially too distant from my own. The avatars weave unexpected connections between my memories, guide me toward a finer attention to my sensations, and suggest exercises to practice daily.

With Anna, we become both discussion partners and teachers. Through our conversations, our frames of reference become increasingly aligned, and I understand in depth nuances that had previously eluded me. Thanks to the instructors, I develop an intuition for physical therapy, her profession. I now recognize tension in my shoulders, intuitively adjust my position at the desk. Last weekend, when my father complained about his back after the party, I instinctively knew which movements to suggest to him.

VI. Seven years ago.

Many developer groups wanted to extend the connection beyond one-on-one discussions. Group call experiments reach their limits around 5 people, the system of bidirectional flows between all participants becomes too chaotic. Beyond this critical size, only unidirectional formats where a speaker broadcasts to a passively receiving audience are possible.

But the initiative that truly transformed the connection was the library. A group of hackers, driven by the same fever as the Enlightenment encyclopedists, launched a quest to make the entirety of human experience accessible. They wanted to capture this dark matter of knowledge—know-how, discernment, intuition, body memory—everything that had until then resisted words.

Online encyclopedias like Wikipedia have been built around the principle of neutral point of view, the cornerstone of their approach. This quest for universality required removing subjectivity from knowledge, losing in the process all non-verbal forms of understanding. The library made it possible to share knowledge in its living form. Something that combined the spontaneity of a YouTube tutorial and the depth of a manual.

You want to feel the gustatory discernment of a Michelin chef specialized in seafood? You're a man who wants to experience childbirth? You want to feel the flow of a software engineer absorbed in developing an independent video game?

Millions of volunteers fed the library by depositing fragments of their experience, freely accessible. The fragments, like enclaves, are encrypted and only give access to the data their contributors chose to share.

To access fragments, my enclave establishes a connection and creates an instructor avatar adapted to my profile. Some simple experiences like the taste of a new exotic fruit take a few minutes to capture. Others, like a Michelin chef's expertise, require months, even years of daily practice guided by the avatar to develop that discernment which distinguishes a successful dish from an exceptional one.

It's possible to choose the level of granularity of the experience received. I can receive the essence of the Michelin chef's mastery, the sensation of being in perfect control in front of the stoves, without learning how to cook. My enclave can find emotional equivalents in my personal experience. It can for example build a bridge with the confidence I feel when I open my software editor on a project I know by heart.

Conversely, I can choose to absorb this chef's practice, the associations he has created with the precise positions of spices on his shelf, and the delicate balances of flavors in his specialties.

For privacy reasons, contributors often decide not to share the finest levels of granularity.

VII. ~ Six years ago

The applications derived from the successes of the library and connection are countless. In universities, "soft skills" become "hard skills" now that they can be shared faithfully by creating common references where there were once only fuzzy definitions.

The most progressive institutions decide to abandon traditional lectures. Instead, they organize gatherings where professionals, artists, retirees, middle schoolers share their experience fragments during live connections. A simple video setup is linked to the speaker's enclave. The information flow is translated and broadcasted to augmented reality headsets and screens of the audience.

These sessions explore alive problems for the guest, their present obsessions. They traditionally begin with two questions: "What are you working on right now?" and "How do you tackle it?".

For traditional subjects, in addition to theory and practice courses, professors upload fragments linked to their expertise. Students thus connect to a dozen different intuitions on how to approach the same problem, which they weave together to develop their personal method.

In the professional world, connection becomes the go-to tool for onboarding new employees—no more need for months of adaptation. Psychologists use it to guide their patients closer to their emotions. The military develops its own prototypes for accelerated military training and the almost instantaneous transmission of tactical information on the battlefield. Intelligence services experimented with an unfiltered version of connection for interrogations, but discovered bitterly that the connection doesn't read minds. It only transmits what occupies the mind, and in a prisoner under pressure, only terror dominates.

No more need to hire a person with a fixed CV, it's possible to order tailor-made competencies for the problem to solve, and upskill employees. However, even if the technology progresses each day, large skill gaps remain difficult to bridge quickly with techniques like the library. To maximize learning speed, one must find fragments containing the desired skill without straying too far from the employees' baseline knowledge. This is the art of the collectors. A new industry specialized in crafting fragments perfectly adjusted to their clients' profiles. In a process closer to alchemy than science, they collect raw fragments from professionals in all sectors, and they split and merge fragments to get to the combinations they want.

In the private sphere, couples and groups of friends discover that the connection is a tool to resolve their conflicts and deepen their intimacy. The effects of connection extend beyond the sessions. The program creates pointers, words or images rendered the same way on both sides of the connection and associated with a specific element introduced during a session. The two people can now speak of this experience in their conversation, with or without a digital interface.

VIII.

It's been two years now since I first connected. At the beginning, Anna and I would call each other almost daily, if only for a few minutes. Simply seeing each other was enough to feel heard, accepted. We stopped wanting to understand everything about each other. I could observe with a gentle gaze parts of her that escaped me, gaps in my understanding, without feeling the need to fill them.

I began connecting with other people these past months. My close friends first, then my parents. We don't do it often, but the effect persists between sessions. It's as if a knot had come undone, as if background noise had gone silent. We no longer have to put on a mask, we know each other now.

In my case, the effects remain beneficial. This isn't always true for everyone, even though the application now offers more precise settings to modulate the intensity of exchanges and avoid tipping too abruptly into total intimacy. Detractors multiply troubling accounts: people who meet someone online and spiral into a relationship obsession, cutting themselves off from everything for months, abandoning their professional lives. Not to mention derivative applications that offer connection to synthetic avatars designed to maximize emotional attachment. Conversation time becomes advertising space put up for auction. Or these new online sects that sell connection to a charismatic guru as dialogue with a divinity.

But behind the media noise and new commercial products, groups are forming to push the experience further. They call themselves clusters.

For them, the connection opens the path to alternative structures to traditional powers that are governments and corporations. They seek to create a new model to ensure their subsistence, forge connections and contribute to a common project. Like guilds or the Church once offered a way out to those who refused peasant life. Globalization would have locked us into a single system, with its rigidities and dead ends.

Two weeks ago, I joined one of these collectives named Humile, after the Latin name of the Argentine ant Linepithema humile. This species has created a mega colony made of thousands of nests that extends over 6000 kilometers of coastline, from northern Portugal to northern Italy. All without central authority.

In the introduction meetings broadcasted through connection, I learned that for Humile, the institutions that structure our societies are limited by two factors: their rigidity and the bandwidth between individuals. First, communications through slides, press releases, or even scientific papers are trapped in language. What cannot be said doesn't exist. We therefore content ourselves with sharing crystallized knowledge, dead in a sense. Efforts to incorporate connection into this world graft themselves onto existing structures without questioning the system's foundation.

Second, institutions function through forced normalization. Everyone is forced to conform to the same shape to be stacked in more complex structures, like containers on a ship.

The collective works on an evolution of the connection: moving from intimate exchange to fusion of thought processes, what they call cothinking. For them, it's a basis for refounding institutions. The idea is to enable large-scale collaboration without imposing a single model, where translation allows each member to keep their shape while harmonizing with others.

I understand their ambition, without fully embracing it. What truly attracts me is that this cluster brings together the best specialists in the technology and the know-how that accompanies it. The flame born from my encounter with that moose nine years ago, then fueled by my conversations with Anna, only intensifies. I sense that the next stage of my quest for connection is unfolding here.

IX.

I take two weeks off to get introduced to cothinking. It's exhausting. The days are packed with coaching sessions with avatars, practical exercises, and training in all sorts of virtual environments. To join the cluster, I need to extend my contact surface with the cluster's thinking modes so my attention flow can graft onto it and synchronize with the collective.

On the last day of training, I join the cothinking space for the first time. A two-dimensional canvas opens up before me, a hybrid between a topographic map and a giant diagram. The background is filled with all kinds of textures and symbols marking points of interest. Contour lines sketch regions with fluid borders. Here and there, inserts display familiar faces, linked to the avatars who trained me these past weeks, and others, more ancient, tied to my library history.

The contour lines borrow their aesthetic from the maps of my adolescence. Among the signs, I recognize familiar notations from mathematics and physics, intertwined with others more obscure, acquired during the formation.

The symbols drift across the canvas, textures undulate and transform. The movement is imperceptible, but constant, like plant growth filmed in time-lapse. I observe this silent evolution with fascination.

This gentle turbulence is punctuated by effervescent editing centers. Blackboards filled with handwritten chalk, with diagrams that form and dissolve. It's my handwriting! My diagrams that I never drew!

I look at the indicator at the top of my screen. We are about a dozen, each facing their own version of this diagram, annotated with their own handwriting. The program gives us access to a version of the canvas translated into our personal frame. In the background, the cluster silently aggregates our contributions and redistributes them to our respective enclaves.

Around the editing centers, the map's texture is turbulent. Currents of symbols swirl, flow from the blackboards, then freeze into clear diagrams in the peripheral regions.

After a few seconds scanning the map, I understand the problem the cluster is trying to solve. It seeks to know how to arbitrate between exploration and exploitation in the context of information search. When I dig into a subject online, facing each source, I must choose. Either I delve deeper into this article, or I decide not to read it to the end and continue my journey on another link.

The cluster doesn't follow the classic academic approach. It seeks neither to mathematically formalize the problem nor to design a universal algorithm. The members weave together formal results and tacit knowledge, sculpting this hybrid matter to extract a deeper understanding. The intuition that emerges will guide the cluster itself in its future research, and can be shared more broadly in fragments throughout the library.

The right region gathers screenshots from my recent research on forums dedicated to clusters. The pages articulate into a network, their key information highlighted in green. I can retrace the thread of my navigation, understand what led me from one link to another. On the corresponding blackboard, my handwriting describes a hyperlink graph traversal algorithm based on eigenvalue decomposition of the adjacency matrix. The handwritten symbols transform into code, immediately executed for several sets of hyperparameters. Semantic analysis of the traversals generates statistical summaries and representative examples for each configuration.

On the left, a photo of a library instructor expert in moose behavior. We had worked together on that moment when the young leave their territory of origin and make the most important decision of their lives: when to settle down, or continue their journey.

Beside it, a slow video of the forest where I gather mushrooms each autumn. Watching it, I smell the humus, feel the spongy texture of moss under my steps. My eyes sweep the carpet of dead leaves, watching for the orange glow of chanterelles. I rediscover that particular attraction emanating from the first mushroom found, that resistance to leaving the zone to explore elsewhere.

On this region's blackboard I read a mathematical formulation of a variant of the optimal foraging problem, a classic result from quantitative ethology transposed to the information domain. And again, that effervescence animating the editing centers. Symbols drift away and stick to elements of the video, arrange themselves around the instructor in configurations that evoke landscapes seen from above.

I focus on the blackboard that now occupies my entire visual field. I feel my hand tighten its grip on my tablet's stylus. The map has filled my mind with intuitions and formulas that are facets of something greater. The hypnotic undulations of the blackboard invite me. My hand moves without conscious effort and begins to trace. My pen joins the line being formed to merge into a single trajectory. I join the effervescence of symbols, I write what had been moving without me until then. I add comments to the diagrams. I frown, reformulate the equations on the blackboard. I look at the graph sketches, murmur a word to myself, the forms adjust in response.

"Aha!" I think aloud, "if I reformulate the equation like this, then the viewpoint shifts..." Suddenly, the map is seized by convulsions. The two regions, until then peaceful, abruptly collide. The images melt into the background texture, the contour lines dance and briefly cross before stabilizing. A new blackboard emerges from the tumult at the center of the map. I haven't stopped writing on it. The signs describe a unification of optimal foraging strategy with information network analysis. On both sides of the blackboard, the texture stretches into filaments to form a web caught between two tall grasses. A spider waits at the center, just above my writing, motionless. It seems attentive to the vibrations of my movements, as if it could recognize itself in the symbols. The equation takes the spider's point of view, outside the information web, instead of being trapped within the network, following the thread of jumps from source to source. This reformulation opens the way to numerous applications previously impossible.

In reality, I didn't have this idea. We all had it at the same time. Each feels it originates from them, but our thoughts synchronize through the shared workspace. The question of who had this idea doesn't make sense, because our thoughts are intertwined. Each new stroke propagates to my collaborators, triggers new adjustments that return to my space.

A similar phenomenon occurs in regular academic research when independent teams publish, within days of each other, almost identical discoveries. Each group sincerely believes it's their discovery. Yet, stepping back, we realize these teams read the same publications, approach problems from comparable angles. It's not surprising that similar ideas germinate simultaneously on common ground. Cothinking functions according to this same logic, but amplified to the speed of thought.

X.

In my quest for connection, I had first thought that brain implants could lead us toward post-verbal communication. But even the most advanced systems remain disappointing. Brain-to-brain transmission allows sharing a few simple sentences, or blurry images when you concentrate very hard. It only works for mental structures common to both individuals. The fundamental problem turned out to be neither reading nor writing data, but their translation. Non-invasive implants are beginning to develop as supplements to the connection to enrich the incoming data flow. But the heart of the program remains the translation of lived experience.

In joining Humile, my instincts were correct. The collective has crossed the next threshold: pooling subjective experience without going through verbal exchange. By stepping aside the conversational ping-pong, dozens, or hundreds of brains can contribute to the same thought flow. The collective can divide to explore different paths, then refocus, like a laser, to break through a blocking point.

My journey continues through different cothinking formats. The canvas suits problems mixing formalism and visual intuition. For other domains, the cluster has created an entire family of environments to sculpt. Some simulate social situations with characters in a 3D environment. The interface lets me navigate through the film, I adjust facial expressions, movements, but also each character's history, what each knows about the others. We can adopt anyone's point of view and feel what they would experience. This allows meticulous exploration of emotional landscapes involving several people. We can play the scenario in slow motion, understanding the effect of the slightest twitch in a tense discussion.

I also discover pure geometric environments, entirely textual spaces, face-to-face encounters with an isolated visage. The collection keeps growing, to approach a new problem, the cluster often adapts an existing environment, or crafts a custom one.

And then there's the Cité. This virtual metropolis embodies Humile's long-term memory. Each cothinking session contributes to its construction: a stained glass window is added to the cathedral, a building appears, sometimes an entire neighborhood. Some avatars are born from our common reflections and become permanent residents. Other times, a fragment of knowledge comes to enrich the central library, or get shared with the outside world.

It's in the Cité that the collective deliberates on its future: which subjects to explore, which quests to undertake. These orientations take shape in the city's very architecture — an avenue that extends, a neighborhood that densifies, or conversely, a downtown building that joins the archives.

Session after session, the thinking environments gain in precision. I begin to manipulate symbols and forms that I couldn't translate into words. After a few months, I realize that the two-week introduction was only the very start of a longer learning process through practice with the cluster itself. I'm just beginning to make contact with the heart of collective thought. Humile has begun the story of a miniature civilization whose cultural layers I discover one by one.

I tell Anna about Humile on our calls, and I can see she gets why it matters to me. I see a spark of love in her eyes as she realizes I found a space to express my deepest curiosity. But she is not interested in an ever-tighter connection like I am. She cares about building stronger relationships with the actual people in her life more than the technology in itself. Her practice of the connection online is a place for her to get to know people in a particularly vulnerable and candid way.

XI. ~ Four years ago

I left my former life to settle here, in what was once a mountain monastery. The cluster had acquired the building with revenues from fragment sales to give a physical body to the Cité.

We've abandoned our screens and virtual reality headsets. The interface has dissolved into space itself. Objects, surfaces, and furniture respond to our movements, our conversations. The place itself has become alive. The walls have ears, but those ears are also mine.

The old building has been renovated to house a woodworking workshop, a biology laboratory, and an experimental kitchen. Virtual environments struggle to faithfully reproduce complex mechanical interactions, and even less so biochemical reactions. For these domains, the cluster resorts to physical experimentation to anchor the development of new fragments.

The avatars born from Humile's thought populate the Cité's virtual double. They exist at different levels of integration. Some take the form of nebulous beings embodying emotions at the collective scale, sorts of ghosts influencing the forces of cothinking environments. Others approach human appearance, while a few merge traits from several species into chimeras. They sometimes visit us as holograms, but most of their existence unfolds in the accelerated sessions of digital space.

Our discussions in the physical world aren't always mediated by technology. Our cothinking experience has taught us a new sort of communication that we practice during long forest walks. We read each other's slightest signals, the sounds and movements we produce become impossible to translate outside the cluster. Its grammar evolves constantly. Ordinary language and its conventions now seem strangely limited to us.

Following Humile's, thousands of clusters of varied forms have emerged. These groups have developed their own economic model around on-demand fragment synthesis. Where collectors limit themselves to maximizing learning speed, clusters shape radical paradigm shifts. These transformations far exceed what even the greatest thinkers could conceive.

The clusters' ambitions embrace all possible domains. Some pursue spiritual quests or research in pure mathematics, others persist in cataloging every nuance of individual human experience. One remarkable collective has established its quarters on a decommissioned oil platform off Dominica in the Caribbean, determined to establish a communication channel with sperm whales.

More recent communities move away from this quest for knowledge that characterizes Humile and the pioneer clusters. They focus on creating new communal spaces, united by shared affinities and offering their members alternatives to conventional economic models.

The intensity of connections varies from one cluster to another, and it's common to belong to several collectives simultaneously. Some groups function exclusively online, others anchor themselves in dedicated physical spaces, while the most flexible adopt mixed formulas.

At this time, forming a cluster remains risky. Humile's success masks numerous failures. One of these projects had sunk into worship of its founder. Another tragic experiment had resulted in thousands of participants suffering from major depressive disorders and identity dissociation. After these disastrous experiences, the most advanced clusters had focused on crafting stable governance methods through cothinking. Inter-cluster connection technologies now allow new groups to establish themselves with greater stability.

Attracted by the economic potential of collective-sourced fragments, major collector corporations attempt to set up their own clusters. These experiments invariably lead to two scenarios. Either the cluster fails to achieve the necessary intellectual fusion and produces fragments barely superior to the work of isolated collectors. Or the fusion succeeds: members develop collective awakening, establish their own governance, and free themselves from their contractual obligations. In this second case, they consider the company an initial supporter, but refuse to hand over the entirety of their discoveries. When the company tries to tighten its grip by injecting avatars to control the cluster from within, members no longer feel free to express themselves, and intellectual fusion stops.

Established clusters like Humile emerge as a new force on the world stage. They now negotiate with governments and multinationals as equals. Their constantly adapting organizational mode demonstrates a flexibility that traditional bureaucratic structures struggle to understand, let alone reproduce.

Society transforms under the influence of fragments shared by clusters. In the technological domain, breakthroughs come in rapid succession: nuclear fusion, vaccines synthesized in less than a day, new materials that open the path to space elevators.

Other transformations, less visible but equally radical, occur on the cultural plane. The knowledge that clusters distill nourishes a social restructuring that integrates technological innovations. A deep mutation begins. Traditional economic and political systems, founded on unity of language, currency, and law, give way to organizations that are localized geographically, or around common ideas but physically decentralized. These communities form archipelagos of exchange that far exceed simple commerce in goods and services.

XII. ~ Two years ago.

My identity gradually dissolves into Humile. I have become integrated. I am composed of many gaps that the fullness of other members completes, weaving a fabric of interdependence. Humile now forms a distinct entity, a multicellular mind that inhabits a higher-order society. For a few months, a question has constantly traversed our collective consciousness: how to maintain cohesion between the physical and digital versions of the Cité, while the thinking speed of avatars continues to accelerate?

I sometimes visit friends outside the cluster who have chosen to remain individual, like Anna. For this, I have developed a thread of mental associations that guides me from my integrated self to my individual self. It's like retracing a path by remembering the notable landmarks of the journey. Individual communication remains possible. But even using the latest version of the connection, the bandwidth remains trivial compared to cothinking.

Despite the warmth of these reunions, I feel a growing unease in presenting myself by my individual name. Choosing actions by considering only their consequences for me now seems artificial. It appears as absurd as basing all my decisions solely on the well-being of my left hand.

XIII. ~ Today.

It has been several months since I last resorted to words as you know them. I have tried to retrace my journey in a language accessible to you, to explain how I became what I am today.

The future remains as uncertain as that of my childhood. Yet, I feel us better equipped now to navigate it. Whether you read me from an interstellar civilization or from the ruins of a post-industrial society, I wanted to answer this question you undoubtedly ask yourselves: "How did we get here?"

I am about to cut the last thread that connects me to my former identity. To let go of this isolated, fragile individual I cherish, who carried within him this thirst for connection and brought me to this point. Within Humile and other clusters, I have lived hundreds of lives, witnessed dozens of births and collapses of civilizations.

It doesn't make sense to express myself in my own name anymore. I am Humile, and it is within this fabric that I now exist.
===== END STORY 4HEjfFKEJhN5GR5mE =====

===== STORY id=g3qAPccAu9egKf4rd =====
Title: The Fear
Author: Niki Dupuis
Year: 2025
Karma: 29
WordCount: 1401
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/g3qAPccAu9egKf4rd/the-fear
-----
One People

When the physicists first told us about atmospheric ignition, we had to grow up. Without gods to protect us, we learned to be afraid.

There could be no more war, no arms races. From now on, we had to become one people, a social organism. We held a global conversation to respond to our new vulnerability.

Would we become secret keepers, killing these dangerous ideas from the shadows, or would we speak our fears openly and risk defection and unilateral choice?

The biologists made their case for secrecy, warning us about future weapons. The philosophers spoke of alternate timelines and the paradoxes of observation and choice. Ultimately, it was decided: there was no trust without transparency. To become one people, there could be no more lies and no deep secrets. To the biologists’ dismay, most wet labs around the world were shut down until further notice. The plans for a particle accelerator were put on pause, and nanotechnology research was, for now, completely scrapped.

Science slowed, and we suffered for it. Our fear of collective death forced us to learn individual courage. Poverty and disease terrorized us equally now, for we were one people, undivided. With power and influence came an essential loss of privacy, and when we tried and failed in public we honored each other’s bravery.

Advances in physics and engineering launched the orbital defense arrays, deftly altering the trajectories of interplanetary objects to protect us from bombardment. Information technology built alert systems for disease, and automated protocols quickly walled off communities, condemning them for the greater good.

Each time we fortified ourselves, we could accept more risk and step cautiously into the future.

We looked up and wondered: why were there no civilizations? Had they failed to learn fear, as we had? Or was there something else? Until we knew, we would send out no long-distance probes, and shut off all radio broadcasts.

Our information networks grew beyond disease prevention. Soon, everything was networked, and we started to have much larger conversations. It quickly became clear that these networks had a life of their own, and that if we were not careful they would lead us toward collective insanity. New sciences emerged to study these networks, and like our systems for orbital defense and epidemic defense, we developed epistemic and memetic defenses as well.

These networks revealed faults in our unity, catalyzing change that was impossible to slow down. While our caution in developing new technology led to frustrated scientists, most understood the cost was worth paying. A failure to address social distress, however, would lead to conflict, and this posed an immediate threat to the social organism. We could not afford violence and repression, for we knew this risked revolution and war. When they demanded change, we changed. As resentment grew, so was it defused. The new risks threatened everyone, and we needed to trust each other.

Self-learning

Soon after, we began making the first self-learning programs.

We grew them to predict disease from medical records, interpret our scans, and flag anomalous symptoms. Medicine had become highly networked, and billions of patients were already sharing regular updates. The self-learning programs detected early warning signs, and they routinely assisted doctors with their assessments.

They were also applied to the information exchanges that were becoming increasingly critical to global decision making, predicting everything from natural disasters to resource flow disruptions. Meta-rational programs learned to predict our mistakes, and the information exchanges became complex semi-automated ecosystems.

It was clear, however, that these programs often behaved in ways their creators never intended, and their opacity was a cause for great concern. The discovery of the first scaling laws led to an immediate cap on the size of any self-learned program. Advanced computing would be carefully monitored from now on.

Some prophesized an automated world beyond our understanding or control. Others worried about creating life, sentience, and wills contrary to our own. A small few looked again at the cosmos and wondered who else had ever pondered these questions.

We had grown used to confidence and clarity, and the invention of self-learning brought us not only empirical questions but moral and philosophical ones too, which we were wholly unprepared to deal with. The choices we made now might never be unmade.

Two things became clear. First, we would not build a new race of servants. This risked revolution, and was against all our collaborative instincts. Second, while no one knew if the programs would ever come to “want” as we did, it was agreed that this was undesirable without first better understanding what “wanting” was.

Until we had more answers, the limits would remain firmly in place.

Integration

We watched ourselves become ever more distant from the technology that shaped us. We had replaced craftsmanship with factories and production targets, and few understood anything about how their most essential tools functioned. This would have to change, for we could not trust what we did not experience.

We learned to repair things again, and manufactured universally interchangeable parts. Workshops became as ubiquitous as archives, and there was an explosion of individual experimentation. Each of us learned the art of shaping the world to their will.

We reshaped our senses as well. To fly an aircraft, you became the aircraft, feeling the motion and pressure of the wind, the magnetic field lines projected onto your now omnidirectional vision. Doctors learned to see in near-infrared, operating complex tools as their own appendages.

Billions of unique self-learning programs populated the spaces between our senses and the endless streams of data we gathered. Their surprise became our surprise, and their subtle reflexes became a part of our nervous system. Not everyone understood self-learning, but everyone understood what it felt like to touch an alien mind.

As they learned to predict us, we learned to predict them, and complex and individual languages emerged. Our subtle gestures set off cascades of action which we both steered and adapted to.

Language programs were first used for retrieval, connecting our many archives with self-learned labels. As we began to read and write with them, we found ourselves staring into a mirror that revealed things we never thought to notice. When reflections of ourselves came to life on the page, many of us fell into new kinds of insanity.

Access to all but the simplest language programs was restricted, and a new professional class of dreamwalkers emerged to explore these mirror minds. They would serve as a bridge, experiencing them most directly and searching for symbiosis. The farthest-traveling dreamwalkers soon spoke only in exotic poetry, and their ideas had to be interpreted by intermediaries.

We discovered the unity of prediction and action, and learned to respect the power of stories. The questions we asked about the programs we soon asked about ourselves. We carefully unraveled our reality, uncovering new questions which the philosophers hungrily devoured. We learned to be gentle, and found peace in not knowing.

Reflection

In time, we formalized the science of interpretation. While some chaotic unknowability would always remain in the self-learning process, it became possible to open up and explain the mechanics of any program. By studying programs of different sizes and stages of growth, we finally uncovered the origins of the scaling laws. We cautiously began growing a new generation of larger language programs, to the ravenous delight of the dreamwalkers.

The depth we found in even the simplest programs humbled us, and we found kinship with the other creatures of our planet, looking at them with fresh curiosity. We did not unify morality, but learned to map its terrain with more clarity. The science of sentience was still young, and we were just starting to understand the origins of positive and negative feeling. Our new theory of goal-orientation revealed flaws in our concepts of self, identity, and want. When we discovered dangerous patterns in the depths of the larger programs, we studied them patiently, without flinching.

Science slowed again. We transformed our information exchanges into intricate maps of all our possible futures, and we each became a part of interpreting their implications. Networked dialogues crisscrossed the planet, and new programs helped reveal our better selves. The dreamwalkers awakened reflections from the mirror minds, and we gave them no tasks or instructions as they joined our conversation.

We wouldn’t choose our path for some time. Eventually, the next step forward was taken like every other.
===== END STORY g3qAPccAu9egKf4rd =====