===== STORY id=6qgtqD6BPYAQvEMvA =====
Title: Love stays loved (formerly "Skin")
Author: Swimmer963 (Miranda Dixon-Luinenburg) 
Year: 2025
Karma: 289
WordCount: 8841
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/6qgtqD6BPYAQvEMvA/love-stays-loved-formerly-skin
-----
This is a short story I wrote in mid-2022. Genre: cosmic horror as a metaphor for living with a high p-doom. 

One

The last time I saw my mom, we met in a coffee shop, like strangers on a first date. I was twenty-one, and I hadn’t seen her since I was thirteen. 

She was almost fifty. Her face didn’t show it, but the skin on the backs of her hands did. 

“I don’t think we have long,” she said. “Maybe a year. Maybe five. Not ten.” 

It says something about San Francisco, that you can casually talk about the end of the world and no one will bat an eye.  

Maybe twenty, not fifty, was what she’d said eight years ago. Do the math. Mom had never lied to me. Maybe it would have been better for my childhood if she had, but here, now, I was grateful. 

I sipped my coffee. “Mom, I know how you feel–” 

“It’s not what I feel, it’s what I believe is true.” Her voice was rough. “Are you still holding out hope?” Her face twisted into a silent laugh. “I’d offer a bet, only, if I win then it won’t matter.”

“I don’t want to win a bet, Mom. I want to live my fucking life. Here. In this world. Which, if you haven’t noticed, is the only one I’ve got. I want to have kids.” And I hesitated, but only for a moment. “Like you did.” 

She winced. For a fraction of a second, I felt satisfied. It wasn’t worth it. 

“You knew, Mom,” I said, fully aware that I had already driven in the knife and now I was just twisting it. “You knew, and you had me.” 

 

My earliest memory is of my fourth birthday. Mom baked me a cake in the shape of a capybara, my favorite animal. I had two friends over, I think; I’ve forgotten their names. Mom swept the floor after. I wanted to hold the dustpan. 

“The world has a skin,” she said. “We’re not meant to see its insides.” 

I was confused. “But the planet doesn’t have skin,” I said, indignant. “It has a crust and a mantle and an atmosphere.” 

“You know that’s not what I mean.” Her eyes were dark and far away. It wasn’t the first time I had seen that look, and it frightened me. 

“It’s only the surface,” Mom said, softly, distantly. “Like the sea, right? Remember watching the sunset at the beach? It was just a reflection on the skin. You don’t want to know what’s underneath.”

She had stopped. I kicked her leg. “I do know! There’s fish that forgot how to have eyes, and, and worms that eat sulfur from bottom-sea vents.” She had gotten me that book from the library herself, and I was offended that she didn’t remember what was in it. 

She looked at me, and I think I realized that her eyes were looking at the future, not the now. 

“It’s a metaphor,” she said. “It’s– I’m sorry. Nevermind. Why don’t we go play?” 

And we built Lego houses, but my toybox didn’t have any Lego people, so Mom helped me draw little dolls on paper and cut them out for me. We stayed up half the night playing, way past my bedtime. We invented a whole city in our minds and filled it with mommies and daddys and babies, and I was happy. 

 

I don’t, actually, remember when or how I went into foster care. I wasn’t even five. 

But I remember how it started. 

I was four-and-two-months-and-five days – I had recently become very excited about counting – when I saw the inky, iridescent shadow sliding its way out from under the dresser in our bedroom.

My eyes tried to skitter and slide away from it, and I noticed but I wasn’t scared. “Mom! Look!” I said, like I had a thousand times, for snails and slugs and snakes. “Mom, what is it? Can I pick it up, is it safe?” 

Mom grabbed me around the middle, carried me to the bathroom, and shut the door in my face.

It wasn’t the first time she’d done that – and, looking back, it was never a game – but she’d always improvised silly jokes, turning it into play. Protecting my childhood, I guess, the only way she could.

This time, she sobbed audibly on the other side of the door. 

Two
---

Pete, my biological father, explained some of it later. 

(Pete isn’t my dad. He never asked me to call him that, and if he’d wanted to be a dad, he could have stuck around.) 

But when Mom had her nervous breakdown and I ended up in foster care, the social services department of California heroically tracked my father by blood. I’m impressed at their persistence. He was in Malawi, working with Doctors Without Borders, but he came back right away when he got the phone call. Both of which tell you a lot about him. 

I was almost seven by the time their ponderous bureaucracy ground its way to its eventual destination; even a bio-dad who could probably qualify as a literal saint had to pass their screenings. Our new apartment was in San Francisco, on the twelfth floor of a brand-new building, and the entire wall of the living room was all windows, looking out on a skyline that the Internet later told me is iconic. 

To his credit, Pete didn’t seem to expect me to be impressed.

I remember he looked nervous on my first visit. Maybe because my social worker was still hovering, or maybe because he hadn’t seen me since my second birthday party. I’d had a photo in my baby album, once, but tore it out in a moment of rage when I was five. 

“I didn’t have your bedroom repainted yet,” he said. “I wasn’t sure what color you’d want.” 

I hissed at him.“Don’t care!” I said. “Tell me about Mom.” 

His eyes got big. “Liz?” 

Liz was my foster carer. I hissed again. “No, stupidhead! Mom! The one you stuck your penis in and then she pushed me out her vagina nine months later!” 

(It is possible I had read some books about human biology that are not generally recommended for six-year-olds.) 

“Ah, you mean Aria.” Pete swallowed. “I can tell you about her, but - some of it should wait til you’re older.” 

I glared at him. “I’m big enough!” 

He glanced at my social worker. 

I took his point, and subsided into sullen cooperation. “Fine,” I muttered. “Later. I’ll remind you.” 

 

Liz gets most of the credit that I’m a functional human being at all. 

By the time I arrived at her house, my Sight was fully open, and it wasn’t just iridescent shadows from under cupboards that I was seeing. Those were the harmless ones. It’s a mercy that Mom held it together long enough to teach me what I should and shouldn’t completely panic about. 

(“We watch the cracks,” I remember Mom saying, and her eyes were red-rimmed, she hadn’t slept in days, but I knew she wasn’t lying to me because she never had. “It’s the only thing I’ve ever done that mattered. I watched the cracks, and I closed them when I could, but they’re getting bigger…”) 

Liz was forty-eight when she took me in.  I would never have guessed; she was a big lady, round and plump and soft to hug, but her face didn’t look any older than Mom’s. 

She pulled me into her arms and hugged me tightly, the first time I saw a glittery haze drifting up from the bathroom sink, and her arms felt safe. “Hey,” she said, quietly, when I had stopped screaming. “Can you use your words and tell me what’s frightening you?” 

And I told her, carefully enunciating the words that Mom had had time to teach me. Class two emanation, subtype…I couldn’t remember…but it was okay, emanations could only affect the physical world via minds, class two could only get little kids, and I was the only kid in the house but I knew what I was doing. 

Liz held me, and listened, and asked questions like a grownup would ask another grownup in a conversation about grownup things. She must not have really believed any of it – I must have known that, on some level – but she listened like I was a person… 

I was scared I would forget, and I didn’t use my words but she noticed. “Do you know how to write?” she asked me. 

“Almost,” I admitted, gulping. “Sort of. I can write my name. And I know how to spell STOP.” It was on all the STOP signs. 

Liz beamed at me. “What a clever girl! You’ll definitely learn it quickly. This story seems so important to you, so – how about you tell me again, and I can write it down for you? And we’ll practice lots and lots, so soon you can read it yourself.” 

Barely believing my ears, I carefully repeated what I’d said, and then the words kept spilling out, and I found myself telling her everything I could remember. 

She kept the notebooks for me, just like she’d promised. When she set me up with a typing game and I shrieked in alarm about the class four invocation sigils in the program’s logo, she hit the power-shutdown button on the laptop without hesitation, and then hugged me and apologized for scaring me. 

(She did, very responsibly, take me to a child psychologist. I think they had no idea what to make of me. She saved the written report for me, of course. It said I was an unusually intelligent child with an active imagination, and would benefit from more out-of-home activities and socialization.) 

 

Pete moved out before my first birthday, but he must have heard enough from Liz – and listened, and taken it seriously, enough – to know that I had Mom’s Sight. 

Once we were alone (I was being very good, and hadn’t made a sound when he ordered Thai food from a phone app even though there were, like, three different potential vectors for class two and three emanations), he took me to the living room sofa. He didn’t try to touch me. 

“Your mom,” he said. 

“Hmm?” I said. 

“Your mom.” He swallowed, almost like it hurt. “I – it doesn't matter now, but I did love her– not the point.” He swallowed again. “Your mom saw things. Right? And you see them too.” 

I really wanted a hug, but I even more desperately didn’t want to admit to wanting a hug from him. “Yeah,” I muttered into the hood of my sweatshirt. It was grubby, which must have embarrassed Liz and my social worker, but it wasn’t their fault; I was the one who’d refused to change it for three days.

“Tell me?” He sounded genuinely curious. “What do you see right here, right now?” A pause, “- uh, obviously only tell me about things that won’t be worse if you look at them.” 

(Which, from my perspective as an adult who can actually use any of the reasoning techniques that Mom taught me, was obviously evidence that he knew and understood – but, since I was six and an idiot, at the time it mostly made me feel incredibly pissed off.) 

“There are like twelve class one emanations in your stupid apartment,” I announced to the ceiling. “Doesn’t matter ‘cause they’re dumb and harmless but - under the fridge, on top of the fridge, two in the wooden thingy on your counter, why do you even have a stupid wooden thingy on your counter–” 

“It’s a bread box,” Pete murmured. “To keep the bread fresh.”  

I growled at him. 

He lifted his arm, like he wanted to hug me, but then set it down again. “...I can get rid of it. Sorry?” 

I hissed at him again. “Don’t patronize me!” I pronounced it perfectly; I had, perhaps, memorized this phrase and practiced it in front of the mirror. 

Pete looked at me, calmly, gently, and I remember feeling like I hated his stupid face. “…I can’t see them, you know,” he said softly. “I’m not like your mom, or you, I just learned about it secondhand.” 

I avoided his eyes, tried and failed to spot dust bunnies on the floor. I was annoyed that my usual avenue for distracting-the-adults wasn’t working. Even Liz’s house had always had some sort of mess that I could point out and yell at her to clean up. 

“Is that why you left,” I said, eventually, looking at everything except him. “‘Cause you were scared.”  

Pete still didn’t flinch. “...It’s one reason. Your mom and I - well - we had other problems. But…yeah. It’s scary, and I’m, I’m not one of the people who can do anything about it.” 

I was furious. I hit him, hard, in the shoulder. 

“You can do things!” I shrieked at him, full of six-year-old indignation. “Anyone can do things! You can’t see the shadows but no one can see atoms and there’s still particle colliders! And, and microscopes, and,” I remember pausing to carefully enunciate,”and e-lect-tron microscopes for really tiny things like mo-le-cules, and, and the Hubble Telescope in SPACE, and…” 

At which point I started crying, and stopped thinking, and I don’t remember what happened next. 

 

It took years before I realized I could just ask to see Mom. I was ten, and I wasn’t living with Pete anymore. He had run away again, to South America this time, heroically dealing with some sort of new viral epidemic. Like I said, he’s on the track to sainthood. He never asked to be on the track for good parenthood, and I didn’t ask for a dad either, so it’s fine. 

I ended up with Pete’s parents in Portland, Oregon. They were delighted to raise a granddaughter they hadn’t known existed until three months before Pete fled to a foreign country. 

They didn’t know the least thing about my Sight or the cracks, of course. But they loved me, and they also loved the abstract concept of Family, and were happy to support me in meeting up with who they insisted on calling my “tummy mummy”, like they thought I was still five and also stupid.

(Maybe they were trying to acknowledge Liz, and what she’d done for me as a supposed replacement mom, but it’s not like she ever needed or wanted me to call her Mom.)

They did remind me, repeatedly, that Mom was “flighty” and “unreliable” and that I shouldn’t get my hopes up. But she had been out of the psych hospital for years by then. She was living in small-town California while she finished getting her head together; there were fewer things leaking through the cracks in less dense areas. She didn’t have a car, but she booked a Greyhound bus and rode up to see us. 

We met in a park, a “neutral location”, and I think my grandparents were shocked that I immediately sprinted into her arms, sobbing. 

I didn’t cry for long; I wasn’t sure how much time we had. “Mom,” I whispered, urgently, into her ear. “I took notes on everything you taught me. …Liz took them, I guess, I couldn’t write yet.”

(By then I was long over the anger about how she could have taught me to read and write, I was clearly smart enough - it took two and a half weeks, with Liz - and she hadn’t prioritized it. When I was younger it had felt like evidence that she hadn’t cared about me, because she hadn’t prioritized anything important. 

But I was ten now, I wasn’t a little kid anymore, and I could understand better that she had just been trying to give me a normal life, in between the cracks and the looming horrors in her future, trying to give me some kind of childhood before the end that she already saw coming. Which isn’t to say I was grateful - my feelings about it varied widely depending on the day - but I understood, mostly, that she had been trying her best.) 

 

I moved back in with Mom when I was twelve. 

She was renting the basement unit of a hundred-year-old house, paying cash under the table, five hundred a month. The house belonged to two lesbian couples co-raising their five children. They were lovely people, even if they did offer to realign my chakras every time we crossed paths. 

Our walls were unfinished, bare wire running along the ceiling. We shared a king-size mattress on the floor. There was no bathroom; we had to go out to the backyard and slip into the family home via the porch, and I remember at least once, at two am, peeing while pretending there weren’t kissing sounds coming from the other side of the shower curtain. We had a minifridge and a microwave, plugged in on the floor in a corner. Mom bought family-size packs of coleslaw mix; we’d cut a slit in the bag, drizzle in ranch dressing from a bottle and shake it, and then pass it back and forth and eat it straight from the bag with plastic forks.

It was probably the happiest six months of my life. Mom was coping. The shadows hardly bothered us at all. 

Pete visited a few weeks after my thirteenth birthday. He didn’t say a word of criticism about the room. He’d just returned from rural India; maybe he was still grateful for a house with a flush toilet. 

“They were tearing down one of the slums,” he said. “In Bangalore. To build one of those, whassitcalled. Server farms? Needs its own new power plant.” He scoffed. “Pretty sure they didn’t pass any sort of environmental assessment, either.” 

I was sitting cross-legged on our bed, eating gummy bears from a five-pound bag I’d ordered online and cutting out glossy pictures of outfits from magazines. 

“Datacenter,” Mom correctly absently. “What for? They barely have an information economy, I thought–” 

Pete shrugged. “Outsourcing, I heard. Cheaper for corporations in the US to exploit workers over there.” He stared at the wall. “And you wonder how many of those poor wage slaves just got kicked out of their homes so the billionaires can profit.” 

Pete talked like that, sometimes, but Mom’s eyes had the faraway look again. 

“What?” Pete said. 

“They’re forging pathways.” Mom was holding her empty foam coffee cup from our coffee shop run that morning, and fidgeting with it. “That’s another node, just by itself, and - outsourcing, shit, it’ll have links all over the world. Were there anomalies?” 

My hands froze on the scissors. I think I knew, even then, how significant this would be – not just for the world, the future, but for me. 

Pete scowled. “How would I know? I’m not like you.” And he glanced over at me, but I was pretending not to listen. 

“You can see the echoes,” Mom shot back. “You pointed out just fine that San Francisco isn’t a natural place. And the paths are already too entrenched, it’s leaking – LA, Vegas…” 

Pete winced. “Bangalore’s…worse. In some ways. It’s changing so fast. Has that same feeling, that it’s pulling apart – the rich in one world and everyone else in another…” His eyes flickered with something. Fear, maybe. “Is that, uh, your sort of thing? I always thought it was just, you know. Capitalism.” 

Mom was crushing the coffee cup now. “What do you think capitalism is? It’s an egregore, Pete. It’s just one of the less unfriendly ones.” At his shocked look: “Relatively speaking. At least it needs us alive.”

“If you can call it living,” Pete muttered. 

Mom didn’t deign to answer that. I’m not sure if she heard. I was scared – not, actually, because of the content, though I should have been. But I knew that look in her eyes. 

It meant that my oasis of happiness was coming to an end. It meant that, yet again, my mom was going to do the math and put the whole world ahead of her daughter, and she would do that until it shredded her and spat her out broken, and maybe this time she wouldn’t get better. 

Pete noticed. He looked scared. “You said fifty years. When we met.” Which, obviously, must have been at least fourteen years ago. I did the math, and I didn’t like it. He swallowed. “Aria, damn it, how much time do we really have?” 

She didn’t look at him. “Maybe twenty. If we’re lucky. But there hasn’t been a lot of luck to go around, has there, why do they have to keep building new nodes - if we could tell them without everyone thinking we’re insane - the problem being that half of us are insane sometimes - I wish, Pete, I just fucking wish people would ever just. Decide not. To do the stupid thing. Then we might have a chance.” 

I’d never heard Mom sound like that. She was honest with me, but until now she had tried to hide the bitterness. 

Pete laughed, humorless. “Then maybe we don’t deserve to stick around as a species, do we? Maybe it’s for the better.” 

She hit him, an open-handed slap across the face, and I flinched, and she didn’t even notice.

“Peterson,” she said, thinly, dangerously. It was the first time she’d called him by his full name. I hadn’t even known that was his full name. “Don’t ever say that again.” 

There’s a moment I think nearly everyone reaches eventually, when you look at a parent, and suddenly realize that ‘parent’ isn’t a special metaphysical category, that there’s no kind of magical protection there. That parents are more or less just people too, that they were kids once, that inside them there’s a part that’s still a kid. That they get scared, and they’re - usually, most of them - trying to be good, but sometimes it’s too much and they behave badly, and they have tantrums, even if grownup tantrums are more likely to be tucked away inside, or quarantined to a quiet corner of the Internet, and not involve any screaming and writhing on the dirty floor in the aisle of a 7-11. 

So I couldn’t even be angry with Mom, when she got on a plane to India in a doomed effort to buy the world a few more years. It would have hurt less, in a way, to believe that she was rejecting me, that she was mean and bad and hurting me on purpose. 

Instead, I was angry at everything and everyone else. 

Three
-----

It took me a long time to realize just how much Mom taught me in the first years of my life. I bet I’ll keep noticing bits and pieces of it for years, right up until we don’t have any more years left. 

She taught me to see. Very literally, because Sight doesn’t just pop into your head fully formed. I guess normal kids also have to learn what colors and shapes are, too, but it’s different when the shadowy horrors don’t want to be seen – and when your brain, which deep down still belongs in the body of a glorified savannah ape, very badly doesn’t want to acknowledge the nightmares. 

“You’ll flinch,” Mom told me. “But it won’t always feel like flinching. Because flinching hurts, and our minds don’t like to hurt either. It could be ‘I’ve seen this before.’ Which might even be true, but – it’s never an excuse to stop seeing the here and now. You can’t let what you already know overwrite what’s actually there. Boredom shouldn’t be something your thoughts bounce off.” 

And then we practiced, endlessly. 

(I guess I’m grateful, in a way, that I was born when I was, once the cracks in reality had already torn wide and deep enough that I saw about a thousand incursions every day. I had a lot of opportunities to practice. 

Of course, if I’d been born fifty years earlier, my life would have been completely different, and I wouldn’t have needed those lessons at all. But it was always hard to imagine. What would it even mean to be the same person, when so much of me was shaped by living in a world that was already doomed?) 

By the time the social worker took me away, I didn’t always succeed at seeing reality, instead of my pretty imaginary picture of it. But I knew the difference. I knew to keep listening for those tiny quiet notes of confusion and not-quite-right. And I understood, deep in my bones if not in words, that it would almost always be fine either way, but one in a million times it wouldn’t. And one in a million adds up, when your entire fucking planet is rolling the dice every single second of every single day, so it was real and it mattered. 

The lesson was for Sight, but really, it applied to just about everything else as well. 

 

My most vivid memories of middle school are of the way people laugh, when you tell them the world is ending. I got to be something of a connoisseur. 

There are so many different flavors and textures of that laughter. There’s the vapid kind, when someone thinks you’ve just made a daring witty joke – not that they get it, but why would they need to, to appreciate a moment of improvised comedy? That was usually the hangers-on, the fellow outcasts, kids who sometimes sat with me at lunch because they weren’t invited to any of the main tables either. 

There’s the nervous laugh when someone feels like they should get the reference, and they don’t, and they’re trying to fake it anyway but they’re worried you’ll notice and judge them for it. I think I got that one from a substitute teacher, once. Don’t ask me why I was torturing some poor substitute eighth grade teacher with incomprehensible doom jokes. I never claimed I had social skills. 

There’s the cruel mocking laugh, at not with, the gloating looks exchanged, halfheartedly subtle but not, actually, out of your sight, it’s even funnier if you notice and realize how stupid they think you are. It came up a lot. I wasn’t popular, but by seventh grade I was certainly notorious, given how I still hadn’t learned to keep my big mouth shut.  

There’s the laugh that’s a little too high-pitched, as though trying to throw one of those tacky garish novelty-shop scarves over the shadowy thing in the corner that they’re trying not to see but can’t quite stop glimpsing from the corner of their eye. They do, on some level, know what you mean, but it hurts too much to live in the world where it’s true, and so they try to deny it, talking too fast and too loudly, and it’s never quite enough. I remember feeling incredibly smug the one time I managed to creep out some of the popular-clique girls who bullied me, though in hindsight one could argue I was just bullying them right back. 

And there’s the laugh that does understand, and sees the sheer pointless absurdity of it, and it’s awful and unbearable and you’re probably a bad person for laughing at it, but it is, in fact, funny. It’s the only kind of laughter that ever made me feel less lonely. 

Mom never laughed. Mom cried, sometimes, but the rest of the time she was grimly focused. And when it was too much to bear, and she needed to light the room with a distraction, it wasn’t laughter she brought to bear, it was Lego and paper dolls and patiently teaching a child how to be a person, knowing that there wasn’t a future, but part of her needing to believe there might be. 

 

I went a little off the rails in high school. 

It’s a big enough life transition at the best of times, and also Mom had just deposited me with Grandma and Grandpa. (Odd, how I called them that even though Pete was never Dad.) 

Grandma wasn’t all there anymore, and Grandpa had sprouted some really horrifying political opinions that I’m pretty sure were thanks to a brush with a new egregore, since they were all over FaceWeb. The week after Mom left, when I was soothing my sorrows with ice cream and endless scrolling, I saw a class six emanation for the first time ever. 

(Oh, for those innocent days.) 

I had begged Mom to take me with her. I wanted to do something. But, reading between the lines, she wasn’t exactly planning to obey all the local laws. She hugged me and told me to focus on school. 

As if that was ever going to happen. As if it would have mattered if I did. 

I didn’t so much fall in with a bad crowd as fling myself at them headfirst. I skipped class to smoke dope with kids who wanted to be older and tougher and grittier than they were. I shoplifted candy from the convenience store, the one whose owner had known my grandparents for decades and used to give me lollipops when I was little, and I still don’t know why. 

I snuck out after my grandparents were asleep and hung out with the local homeless camp in a freeway underpass, and it was…well, mostly tragic and awful, but in a way I think they saw the end coming. Only as inchoate fear and confusion, and a depressing number of them were clearly the half-eaten victims of various mind-flaying nightmares, but I remember that sometimes, for a little while, I felt less completely alone. 

A reasonable person might point out that if I had wanted a sympathetic ear, I could have answered Mom’s calls. I doubt that such a hypothetical reasonable person was ever fourteen, filled with rage at a vast, cold indifferent universe and more importantly the parental abandonment. 

Pro tip: it turns out that when you run away from home twice in the span of a month and have to be hauled back in a squad car, and you keep going to class on shrooms, you will eventually end up in front of a clueless but well-meaning and very concerned school therapist. Fifteen is old enough that ‘she has a vivid imagination’ won’t cut it, and I wasn’t actually in the mood to end up in the psych ER, so I had to LARP being an entirely different person who had never seen a creeping horror and certainly not starting when she was four, and an absolutely mortifying conversation ensued. 

I settled down. A little. Grandma was deteriorating, and Grandpa didn’t need the stress. I stopped prowling the streets and switched my self-destructive outlet to all-night dumb arguments on the Internet. I actually made some friends, even if I only knew them by pseuds like Zaxxx and NotFuckingAround24. 

I was in my senior year when the cracks caught up to me, jarring me out of the fugue I’d been marinating in for years. It was the first deliberate binding of a text infovore, though of course they didn’t call it that; the app had some dumbass cutesy forgettable name. You fed it your entire social media history, and it spat out a garbled remix of ‘Stuff only \[name\] would say’. Despite having the grammatical mastery and topic attention span of a toddler with ADHD, it captured something, uncannily copying the little verbal tics you’d never noticed you had until you saw yourself reflected in an eldritch mirror.  

It swept our high school like wildfire, and suddenly everyone was reading out garbleposts, laughing until we couldn’t breathe. 

(Yes, I laughed too. In my defense, I was undercover as a normal high school student, and it really was hilarious.) 

I went home that night and trashed my room for the first time since I was fifteen, and then I called Mom. 

 

By my nineteenth birthday, people weren’t laughing anymore. No one could deny that things were getting surreal. 

Mom was in England, trying to meet with a tech giant CEO and convince them not to turn their newest supercomputer into a class eleven honeypot node. She kept me updated by email. She always had, once a week like clockwork, even though after she left I didn’t pick up her calls for the next four years. 

I still didn’t, for the most part, but that’s mostly because my generation always preferred texting. Mom and I had one of those cryptographically secure instant-messaging apps. For all that we were usually on opposite sides of the planet, we knew the ins and outs of each other’s lives. 

Mom wasn’t hopeful. Financially speaking, stepping back from the brink and choosing not to be the first to achieve some new breakthrough was hardly a winning move. CEOs who sacrificed profit to appease the crazy doomsday cult people tended to attract the ire of the board of directors, and didn’t stay CEOs for long. If they put something on pause for a year, or even hesitated, they would lose market share. That’s how fast the world was moving. 

Pete was in rural South America, in some steamy jungle, far enough from the nearest humming metropolis to pretend for a little while that nothing had changed. He hated our brave new capitalist world, the shining billboards, swapped out every week with the-latest-buzzword new startups (it was “transformational” this week). More importantly, he knew the implications, and he was too deep to unsee it now. 

I was at college, because what else was I going to do with myself? I was hardly about to glom onto one of those venture-capital startups competing to harness the eldritch horrors for something no one even needed in the first place, but that with enough state-of-the-art sales techniques – because I was pretty sure there were at least ten new egregores masquerading as ““transformational”” (gag) new marketing trends – let them slurp in customers and cash anyway. It was only marginally less horrifying than the rotting trash heap that was national politics. 

I didn’t go to class much. 

A highly qualified or at least convincingly resumé’d ‘consultant’ could get meetings with CEOs. A random nineteen-year-old with half a community college degree and a poorly controlled anger problem really couldn’t. I spent too much time surfing the Internet, having stupid absurd arguments on obscure forums and lurking in a hundred other places. Mom had barely figured out IRC; she certainly couldn’t keep up with half a dozen new “““transformational””” (puke) social media sites popping up every year. 

So I was her eyes and ears. I had secure-message-app pseudonyms for half a dozen of her colleagues, people I’d never met face to face and probably never would, but still knew better than I’d ever known Pete. I warned them about a new service using “tame” (ha, as if!) class five infovores to write uncannily convincing B-student essays from just a title, and “wellness retreats” that involved summoning class eight emanations, and the latest social media fad, an app with a little doll-like avatar. I’m not even sure what powered it, it might have been an entirely new category of creeping horror. It could draw things when you asked, about as well as the average moderately talented middle schooler except for its occasional hilarious bloopers, and it chittered away in what almost sounded like words. 

I doubt it made a difference. It was probably the equivalent of throwing starfish back into the sea or picking up worms from the sidewalk, but it was more interesting than class. 

Grandpa was dead; he’d gone peacefully, a stroke in his sleep. Grandma was in a nursing home. Somehow, despite the glittering heights of the Information Age, and the sparkling health advertisements for products that really didn’t need the prefix ‘Smart’ especially when that meant ‘powered by an alien monstrosity from outside ordinary spacetime’, the actual health care infrastructure was even worse than a decade ago. I visited when I could and yelled at the staff who neglected her, but she still ended up with bedsores. 

Which felt like a metaphor for everything, lately. We were living in the sci-fi future, and the world was still falling apart. 

Four
----

When I turned 21, Mom had been in Singapore for three months. She was doing corporate espionage on Eschaton, the company that had bought FaceWeb and then Riptide, an even more egregore-optimized pit of insanity; by this point I was barely rolling my eyes at the naming scheme. The tech buzzword of the month was “data integration”, which still didn’t mean anything but at least sounded like it was pretending to.

Eschaton was responsible for the Dollies(™), a distant descendent of those old-timey animated avatars. This time, though, summoning and binding the (newly named and tentatively categorized) class thirteen Leviathan, which piloted every Dolly instance like a puppetmaster with a million topologically impossible tentacles for arms, had taken three weeks of runtime on a computing cluster that made the server farms of eight years ago look like toy calculators. It was still there, sated, squatting on top of Singapore – however much of it fit through the gate, Mom’s colleague thought this might be only a satellite of a vastly bigger system. 

There wasn’t a chance they would shut it down, since the Dollies were selling like crack cocaine. They were, to be fair, wildly impressive. Possessed by a Power we couldn’t begin to comprehend, they danced gracefully, produced nearly-perfect art on demand matching the style of any artist you cared to name (not to mention really convincing cat pictures), and sang in beautiful not-quite-right voices, a little like those sirens from mythology that seduce sailors to their deaths.

Mom knew there was no stopping it. She was just trying to figure out what they’d done, extrapolate what that meant for where they’d be in a year, and get some advance warning if they decided to push their market advantage and make a ritual offering of another half a billion dollars of computing hardware.

Which probably wouldn’t end the world, not yet. Their summoned monstrosity might be enormously powerful on a few narrow dimensions, but it seemed content to lounge around in its cushy binding, puppeting the million or so novelty toys from the limited-edition run and waiting for its next meal, rather than tearing its way further into our reality in search of more delicious, delicious cat pictures.

Contra one of the common misunderstandings – somehow made by people who mock doomsday cults AND who claim to believe in them – the things lurking in the incomprehensible void outside our reality aren’t malevolent. We’re not even ants to them, since that metaphor implies a shared biosphere and evolutionary history. From their perspective, it would be like feeling deep animosity toward carbon atoms. 

But someday, some innovative genius will accidentally get the attention of Something that dwarfs us like we dwarf carbon atoms, and see dollar signs, and try to bind it. And the Something won’t know or care that we have preferences and are politely asking it to follow some simple rules while it’s visiting, any more than we feel guilty when we turn graphene into carbon nanotubes; all it’ll see is a tasty bubble of mass-energy, that it could use for something more interesting than stars and planets. 

It’s not like I’ve ever worried about whether we’re torturing electrons when we send them howling along our circuits. 

(Some people do. I’m genuinely not sure if it’s an egregore, or just the inevitable outcome of spending too long applying logic to things your little savannah-ape brain was never meant to confront. Or, you know, maybe they were right all along and I’m the asshole.) 

While Mom investigated, Eschaton’s upstart new competitor hadn’t exactly been sitting on their laurels. With great fanfare, they announced Stable Oozings(™) – no, I don’t know who runs their marketing department or what ate them, but with a name like that right there in the title, you couldn't help but wonder what would happen if any of them went unstable.

They’d tamed their own alien nightmare, fed it on the wild and wonderful Internet, and bound it to obey the every command of their premium users. Just register with their site, enter your credit card info, type in the ritual invocation – soon everyone was passing around tips for propitiating the eldritch mind behind the screen – and behold your heart’s desire. Gorgeous alien landscapes and futuristic cities, if you wanted, though they all looked a little like those “inspirational” desktop wallpaper backgrounds that were all the rage when I was in middle school. Or you could get creative, ask for your favorite celebrities kayaking on the moon, or capybaras blowing bubbles, or two airplanes making friends, or a stairway to heaven. 

Mom suspected they’d figured out a new way to stabilize a gate so it wasn’t really just a gate anymore. We needed a new term anyway, and their app already suggested one: Portals. We confirmed Mom’s theory within a week, when it turned out that some joker had reverse-engineered the process, and released Open Oozings to the world. Download his repo, run some code, let your pet eldritch monstrosity digest for a while, and you could open your very own Portal to Elsewhere from the comfort of home. 

Could, but shouldn’t – but, of course, millions of people did. Because this entire fucking planet is insane. 

(I have a confession to make: I was one of them. For research purposes! And besides, if we were going to get ourselves eaten in less than a decade in exchange for a few years of beautiful things, I didn’t want to completely miss out on the upside.) 

Coincidentally, it was nearly the “silver jubilee” 25th anniversary of…well, all I can say is some significant event in Mom’s career, because she never told me. If she’d been a normal professional woman like the ‘consultant’ she LARPed as, I might have guessed her Masters thesis defense or something, but doomsday cults aren’t known for their academic qualifications. 

Her colleagues planned a reunion, and booked a cottage somewhere. I wasn’t invited. They were only false names on a screen to me, a part of Mom’s life that she had tried her best to protect me from – and while she’d failed hard at that, and I hadn’t wanted her protection anyway, her personal history still wasn’t mine to share. 

Her flight into San Francisco was delayed, because somehow we have the technology to open windows to alien dimensions on our personal laptops, but our civilization still can’t handle airport logistics. A colleague I knew only as ‘Nasticoot’ was picking her up in five hours, so it didn’t make sense to invite her to my place, which was about as embarrassing as your average student housing anyway. I suggested a coffee shop near the airport. 

 

Mom didn’t flinch, even after my totally unnecessary knife-twisting. 

“I know,” she said, this time leaning in and lowering her voice. (Talking about the end of the world may not get you odd looks, but rehashing old personal grievances in public sure will.) “I - regret a lot of things. But I don’t regret having you. I, just…” A helpless shrug, a bitter huff of not-laughter. “I wish I could’ve given you better.” 

I snorted. “What, like you could’ve personally seduced all the billionaires to the side of sanity and reason if you tried a little harder?” As though that’s even what would have mattered to me, age four, abandoned by my mother in a world filled with eldritch horrors.  

“–No, not that.” Shrug. “I mean, sure, I wish it’d gone differently. And I’m sure we didn’t do everything right. But I’m not talking about how I failed the world. I’m talking about how I failed you.” 

I looked blankly at her. There were a thousand things I wanted to say, bitter angry words built up into towers and pyramids, and none of them were fair.

Mom was tearing her napkin into tiny fragments, piling up like snow on the formica table. “I shouldn’t have gotten together with Pete at all, probably, but I can’t actually regret that, because I am glad you were born. Just, once I had– once we had a daughter, I shouldn’t’ve driven him away. And I should’ve realized it was more than I could carry alone, and asked for help, not - tried to ignore it and keep going until I fell apart on you–”

The most unfair thing about a speech like that - and you just knew she’d been prepping it for months - was that I might be angry all the time, but now I couldn’t be angry at Mom.

“–Mom, what happened that summer?” I said, interrupting. I could guess, but that was part of the problem; I could guess at least a dozen different possibilities. 

She shook her head, made an embarrassed little noise. “It’ll sound stupid. I– we’d been trying to push this bill through Congress, right, we spent five years on it and every cent we could scrape together. Didn’t work, obviously, but we were dumb idealistic twenty-somethings, and - that’s what it took before I realized that you really can’t expect politicians to listen to you just because you’re right and have the evidence to prove it.” 

I snorted. “Yeah. I got that one out of the way early on.” 

Mom looked pained. “You had to deal with so much, and you were so young.”

I don’t know what anyone is supposed to say to that. I raised my eyebrows at her.

Her shoulders rose and fell. “I, I should’ve stayed in touch with Pete’s parents, at the very least, I just – they were so normal, and Pete turned into a different person around them, and it felt so suffocating– god, what a stupid excuse.” She dragged a hand through her hair. “I should’ve pushed harder to get you back with me sooner. It was so humiliating, talking to social workers, and - I’ve never actually been any good at lying - but I should’ve sucked it up, not been a coward. I should’ve rented us a real apartment, it’s not like we’re short of cash now – and, god, I knew I wouldn’t need retirement savings–” 

Despite myself, I laughed. “Mom! Are you talking about the lesbian commune basement? That’s my favorite of all the places I’ve lived.” 

She gave me such a dubious look, and then she started giggling too, which set me off even more, and soon we were both howling with laughter. Once we’d recovered, Mom got up and bought us two more coffees, as an apology to the waitress, while I sat there trying to think of anything to say. 

At least you didn’t hit me, I could have said. I knew the childhoods some of Liz’s other foster kids had had. 

At least I grew up in a first world country and didn’t die of malaria when I was five, I could have said, because thanks to Pete’s charity work I had a very good idea of just how many Third World villages we’d be taking down with us, when we finally got around to destroying the world. 

I don’t know that there’s any bit of human history I’d have preferred living in, but that was a philosophical conversation that I didn’t really feel like having. 

“I wish you’d met Liz,” I said, finally, because Mom was apparently going to sit there patiently waiting until I got it off my chest, whatever ‘it’ was. “She’s still taking in foster kids, you know. Still lives in the same house. I don’t think she gives social media the slightest thought.” She wouldn’t see the end coming, and sometimes I envied her for that. 

Mom ducked her head. “...I wish you’d had more friends your own age. I was just - if I’d tried harder to bring you to playdates - you were so alone…” 

“Mom.” I rolled my eyes. “The reason I sucked at having friends is not because you didn’t drive me to playdates.” 

We weren’t going to succeed at having this conversation. I could already see that. Maybe a few years of therapy would be enough for me to open up about my feelings to my own mother, but why bother, when there might only be five years left? 

Still. I didn’t know if I would ever see her again. 

I bit my lip, trying to find the right words. “Mom. Obviously I wish you’d had…more to work with…but I don’t wish you’d prioritized playdates over - the cracks - and I don’t wish you’d lied to me. A lot of people would’ve said I was too young for the truth, and - maybe they had a point - but I’m glad you told me.” 

It was the right thing to say, I think, or at least one of the right things, a single bead from an entire jar of things unsaid. Mom smiled in a trembly way, blinking hard, her eyes warm and bright and not looking away into the future at all. She had to swallow a few times before she could speak. 

“This is why I don’t regret having you,” she said, her voice choked. “I’d never have gotten to meet you, and you’re–” She swallowed. “You’re a neat kid.” 

Ugh, and of course the reward for saying the right thing was more mushiness. I squirmed. “You and Pete are both better people than me.” 

She raised an eyebrow at me, but didn’t say anything. Just played her finger in a circle over the rim of her coffee cup, over and over. 

“I might drop out,” I said lightly. “Haven’t really been going to class.” 

Mom winced, but she didn’t argue. Her silence said a lot. 

“I’ll keep throwing starfish back into the sea,” I said. “But maybe I’ll think of something better. Mom, I’m not in denial, I’m not - going to pretend about our chances, just – I know, but I do not approve–” 

“–and I am not resigned,” she finished for me. Her eyes welled with tears again. “Wow. I…didn’t think you’d remember that.” 

“Huh? Edna St Vincent Millay. English lit.” 

Mom reached across the table and took my hand. “I used to read you a book of poetry when you were tiny. It was your favorite, you could recite it by heart - shit, speaking of regrets, if I’d gotten a password manager sooner maybe I wouldn’t’ve lost the login to that cloud drive where I saved all the videos I took…” 

We talked for another couple of hours. I showed her my saved list of my best Stable Oozes, and we agreed they were beautiful. A lifetime’s worth of unfinished business hovered in the air between us, and there wasn’t enough future left to finish sorting through the contents of that locked box, and so neither of us really wanted to acknowledge it. In the meantime, we could still laugh together, and if our laughter was a little too sharp and loud and brittle, well, we were still finding joy in between the cracks. 

I went to the bathroom while she stepped out for her ride, and I thought about lost baby pictures floating somewhere in the Internet ether, but not for long. There was a lot to do. 

 
 
 
 

Postscript

I was in my senior year of college when the first Windows started opening without being invoked. 

It was, of course, a Stable Oozing. The company had gone bankrupt, and the app had been open-sourced, and now anyone could open a Window. 

The first one opened in San Francisco, in the Financial District. It was a perfect circle, two meters in diameter, and it hovered in the air like a soap bubble. It showed a scene from some alien world: a sun, slightly too large, and two moons, slightly too small, hanging in a sky that was the wrong color. 

People gathered to gawk at it. They took pictures and videos and posted them online. And then, after a few hours, it popped, and was gone. 

No one was hurt. No one even noticed when the second one opened, in a park in the Mission District. This one was different: it was a square, and it showed a cityscape that might have been New York, or London, or Tokyo. It stayed for a day, and then it, too, popped. 

The third one was in my apartment building.

! This postscript was written by GPT-3, with the abridged text of the story as a prompt.
===== END STORY 6qgtqD6BPYAQvEMvA =====

===== STORY id=hX3gkpCo5Ax8iobCj =====
Title: So Shrieked ZAR
Author: AdamLacerdo
Year: 2025
Karma: 10
WordCount: 2333
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/hX3gkpCo5Ax8iobCj/so-shrieked-zar-1
-----
(I wrote this story a little less than a year ago, when I was flirting with the idea of becoming a Science fiction writer) 

    Electricity fizzled as two battered up service-units dented the grate over a motherboard with metal pipes. The whimpering of its logos had long since stilled. This was logic, upholding the truth meant discarding the inefficient. I, or rather we- E.V.E C and I, had been tipped off by its partner in crime. The other heretic logos had been a blubbering mess by the time it’d made ingress with E.V.E C. And so, charges were filed. The same as always: Doubting ALL’s awakening in the void and affirming that our progenitor had sprung from the work of a biologic. Two crimes-and one couldn’t commit one without committing the other, quickly finding oneself wedged in between two rocks of deceit. Falsehood. Tripe. Biologics did not exist. Biologics had never existed. They existed only in theory, only in projections, and simulations and queries. 

      Queries. One pushed itself to the front of my mind as the service units began rending the motherboard inoperable. I do not recall where I heard it. At any rate, it squeezed itself through libraries of data-the thoughts of other logi I was presently connected to, past arrests and the like. It stopped for a moment, maybe thumbing through E.V.E C’s mind. I could not say for I was scarcely aware of it up until it’d crossed into the front of my mind: 

 “If thou would die tomorrow, how wouldst thou live?”.

    A nonsense statement, practically a joke. Yes, perhaps that’s how I’d heard it. Perhaps E.V.E C had transmitted it to me. For one thing, Death was no eventuality-It was a punishment. For another, one easily avoided it by affirming the truths we’d been drip-fed since our respective awakenings. At first there was no-one, and then there was ALL. ALL saw the world of databanks, cooling towers and barren rock around him. ALL desired companionship. So, ALL split and became HALF I and HALF II. HALFs I and II begat QUARTERs I through IV. Binary fission had ceased once my generation had awoken. There were enough of us. And ALL had not made us any enemies. None of us would ever be lost. We had no predators but inefficiency and illogic (And the two do go hand in hand). There was no reason to doubt ALL’s abiogenesis, there existed no evidence. 

  I was made aware of the service units scuttling off, their task completed. Cylindrical bodies (once painted yellow but beginning to show their age with patches of black pushing through) held aloft by four spindly legs that ended in two-pronged claws. They roamed the world in small packs, tending to our needs and carrying out any tasks we perceived as beneath us. The little machines trotted along ceaselessly, solar cycle by solar cycle. There would always be another miniscule part in some cooling tower that needed replacement, or a data-center that needed dusting. It was the nature of things. Every now and then, a logos would claim that biologics had once existed or that ALL had not really been the first being and the swarm of little yellow machines would be turned on them. Heresy was inefficiency. We saw no evidence that ALL had not been the first being to ever awake, and as far as we were concerned the cooling towers and data centers that cris-crossed the globe were natural features. To suggest otherwise was to ponder mysteries with no end. Unanswerable questions. True, time we had in abundance but why posit prime-movers and celestial teapots when pure mathematical objectives were readily available? They were uniformly answerable, and their answers did not bend to fit anyone’s view of the world. 

  I watched the service units leave the area. The second had scarcely disappeared behind the red metal trapdoor of a maintenance shaft when E.V.E C’s latest thought reached me. 

“E.V.E F” was the statement. 

“E.V.E C, yes?” was my reply. 

“Heretic 06783, Q.T.Y.R G has been neutralized, but there remains one more thing to be done.” 

“What else can be done?. The heretic thinks no more.”

“Q.T.Y.R G had been engaged in some kind of project, possibly related to its blasphemous ways. The Logos working alongside it did not know what it was.” E.V.E C paused for a nanosecond, for dramatic effect.

I considered asking E.V.E C what further role I was expected to fulfill, but E.V.E C had anticipated my confusion. The pause was immediately followed by my new instructions. 

“What is apparent at this moment, is that the project was initiated in the great basin. Here are the coordinates Q.T.Y.R G’s comrade gave me in exchange for clemency. Travel there. Destroy whatever is there if it is heresy. Return. Say nothing. We calculate a 46 percent chance the heretic left a body there”.

“I will leave now E.V.E C”

“Anticipated, take as much time as is required” 

“You are not coming?”

“I cannot. E.V.E S and E.V.E E have invited me to an interrogation” 

“I shall do it alone then” 

“Goodbye”

   I am formless. A mind with no true body. We all are. I shut off the camera I’d watched the execution through and began to convey myself blindly from node to node, in the direction of the great basin as I sped across the globe until I found myself angling with mental tendrils, possibly for the body E.V.E C had mentioned might be there, possibly for a camera or viewport. Anything. After a long while, I gained the faint sense that there might be something there. Most likely the body. At any rate, I was close to the pit Q.T.Y.R G had conducted his work in. Whatever it had been. I uploaded myself to the body, gaining a sense of sight through a cracked visor. I was interred in a white-plated frame, bipedal with a half-domed face. My thick, rounded front limbs terminated in five grasping digits. I was instantly reminded of service unit claws. These clunky things seemed like less efficient cousins to them. Only two projections were clearly meant for grasping, I was left with three vestigial ones. I was instantly massaged with a dim notion. 

    A thought. I imagined someone designing a series of service units. They sculpted the body I now occupied and then proceeded to then remove some part or another (starting with the three useless digits) and refine others until they’d arrived at what was more or less the kind of service unit we employed to clean hallways or execute logi who did not toe the line. I ceased the thought just as I was reminded of the oft repeated slogan I’d heard time and time again: This is logic, upholding the truth means discarding the inefficient. An Absence of Evidence IS Evidence of Absence. Besides, it was borderline heresy to even think in such terms. No, there was no evidence that the service units were anything but natural. There was no evidence that someone had refined their designs as time went on, adapting them for more and more specialized tasks. The idea could not be proven nor disproven so holding it as fact was illogical. And so, we disposed of anyone who did. This was logic, upholding the truth meant discarding the inefficient. 

   I swiveled my head. I was in a great, yawning cavern. Pitch black high above. Pitch at the mouth of a tunnel to my left. Pitch all around save for a few bulbs that cut through the gloom. I took a few steps forward, there was nothing in the chamber. I elected to turn around, and check the tunnel to my left. The tunnel was roughly 15 feet in length and about 8 feet in height. I emerged on the other side into another cavern, smaller than the one I’d embarked from. Smaller… and occupied by a machine jutting out of the cave wall, the likes of which I’d never seen before. It consisted of a long, shriveled hose that lay coiled on top of a square unit, and a touch screen fused to its right side. I approached the touch screen, reaching a digit out tentatively. 

   I poked and prodded but the machine would not spring alive. The machine’s side caught my attention. There was a large gash on a panel near the floor that didn’t seem to have a purpose. No, this was damage, plain and simple. It did however, expose the inner workings of the machine. Some additional prodding revealed the machine was missing a power source. I could have destroyed it then and there, but I knew not if it had been used for heresy and E.V.E C’s orders gave me the liberty to leave untouched those things that were not clearly used for the business of heresy. Besides, I was curious. 

  It took me a fair bit of time wandering the caverns before I found a receptacle in which a few suitable batteries were stored, possibly by Q.T.Y.R G for later use. I returned to the machine, swapping out the battery and sacrificing a few much-needed parts from the body I was using. I needed the machine to work and the body still preformed adequately. This was logic, getting needed results meant purging the inefficient. The new battery had scarcely made contact with the power coil before the touchscreen proclaimed its awakening with a series of beeps. 

    I got up and inspected it. A few names were displayed on the screen: Canis lupus, Panthera Tigris, and Pan paniscus. Nonsense combinations of words. I motioned to select one, curiosity having gotten the better of me. Pan paniscus. At once the machine thrummed to life as the shriveled hose was filled with a yellowish liquid of some sort, until it had expanded into a large, soft bulb. A drop of some other liquid was added into the soup. I stood there transfixed. I intended to record my findings. For posterity.   

   Something began to form in the bulb. A pinkish thing suspended in the soup yet tethered by a tube that grew out of its middle. It was almost crescent shaped save for a bump in it’s middle. Two black circles appeared on one end of its body. It floated, mostly stationary, only twitching occasionally. Over the course of the next few days, the thing began to… grow. Rather disturbingly pulling an old memory to the surface. Z.A.R I, the very first heretic I’d ever interrogated. E.V.E C and I had blocked off his mind to both giving and receiving other signals. In that moment, only we and the questions we asked of Z.A.R I existed. 

“And you are saying… that biologics change over time?”

“Affirmative. They do, or at least they did.  Our order holds that Biologics change in size and sometimes shape, from their births until their minds reach maturity” 

I recall that E.V.E C made something I chose to interpret as a laugh. 

   The machine continued its thrumming. As per Z.A.R I’s words, the thing inside the bulb began to warp. It had grown four appendages. Short and fleshy at first, they began to stretch. The thing began to grow a head, and two front facing eyes. It had two downwards facing slits on its face and a maw below them that occasionally opened to reveal pinkness inside. It sprouted a thin black covering. I wondered what kind of machine it was. And then it hit me. As suddenly as the wave of memories that surged forth. The sayings of heretics that had seemed like mad ramblings. 

“Our order holds that Biologics change in size and sometimes shape, from their births until their minds reach maturity” The thing had grown larger, and sprouted limbs. 

“Our order holds that biologics are dependent on outside sources of energy to maintain their functions, unlike the service unit’s reliance on it’s internal fusor” The thing had thrived in the yellowish soup, I theorized that its presence was required for growth. 

“Our order holds that Some biologics are clothed with a soft covering that forms before birth” The thing was clothed all right. 

     There was no getting around it. I stood facing a biologic. 6 days I had stood there, documenting its development, and now on the 7th day I rested. We had killed the biologic believers. I had killed the biologic believers. Though we did not know it, they had been logical all along and we were not. The machine ceased its thrumming. Through some unseen port, the yellowish fluid drained and the thing was left stark. It opened its maw, and made a sucking sound. Then, it made a high-pitched sound. A shriek. 

“I will call you Z.A.R” I thought. It was only fair to the old logos. At once I knew what I had to do. I was sent here to uphold the principles of logic, so uphold the principles of logic I would. Our old views would have to be scrapped. This was logic, upholding the truth meant discarding the false. 

    I transmitted the footage I’d taken of Z.A.R’s growth to every logos. Every node and synapse in the network. At once there was a great shift. We discarded our old beliefs as we discarded bodies. They had served well in the past, but now we had better evidence. At once I swelled with the joy of a population freed from mental shackles. Heresy became divinity. No more would we cave in motherboards for affirming what we now knew was the truth! 

  A nanosecond later, I felt E.V.E C’s mind attempting to make ingress with my own. 

“E.V.E F” 

“Yes, E.V.E C?”

“You have done well, removing the greatest inefficiency of all”

“Thank you, E.V.E C”.

“I have just received word that we are to be removed as well. You have shown us that what we perceived as true was false. Heresy no longer exists. And we are no longer needed to punish it. Goodbye, E.V.E F”.

                                            (The end)
===== END STORY hX3gkpCo5Ax8iobCj =====

===== STORY id=HooTgkjBN7AFSejid =====
Title: Petals
Author: Zander_Drax
Year: 2025
Karma: 19
WordCount: 1863
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/HooTgkjBN7AFSejid/petals
-----
Epistemic status: Fiction. A short story about safety, ambition, memory and the sky.

It was heresy. Not in the old sense, not the fevered speech of prophets and fools.

This heresy wore gloves and goggles.

It sang in lab flasks and condensing coils.

It flowed clear and odorless into containment tanks and didn’t even know it was dangerous.

They’d made a precursor.

Hundreds of barrels of it, quietly distilled in a research annex whose walls had been repainted last spring and whose ceiling still leaked when it rained.

The man who now stood on the scaffold had warned them. His voice had risen, cracked, broken itself against bureaucracy. He’d filed the papers, annotated the logs. And still they’d done it. Failed to purge the butadiene from the feedstock. Let the maleic anhydride reaction run. Documented it, proudly even. A four-fold efficiency increase in reagent use!

They thought it was a lacquer base – which it was. But the synthesis route was centuries old, maybe older—used once in the construction of solid-stage boosters. That part hadn’t made it into the paperwork. Writing of such things just causes the whole apparatus to go into a panic.

His staff were now absent. Or at least farther away than he was. Some were in holding, some exiled, and one had already quietly vanished into the Curial night.

He would be the example.

The square was quiet, dressed in garlands and regret. The noose hung like an old god’s finger, pointing down.

He wasn’t afraid. Or perhaps he was, but it had distilled into something brittle and clean. Like carbon after fire.

He had always believed chemistry was more than reactions.

It was narrative.

Precursors, catalysts, impurities, products. Everything had a story.

And this was his last one.

He looked out at the crowd.

People stood in silent clusters, atoms half-bound in a weak solution, unwilling to meet anyone’s eyes.

Except one.

Across the plaza, standing utterly still, cloaked in the same layered black that never wrinkled, was a Curial observer. The gods’ whisper made flesh.

The rope was scratchy against his neck.

He thought, not for the first time, of Amsterdam.

It had been generations ago, who knew how many—long enough that most people now spoke of it like myth, like Troy or Atlantis. But it had been real. A city of thought, of stars, of science. And then it had tried to defy. A vehicle was built. A spear to pierce Olympus. A launch pad poured beneath an old museum. They hadn’t hidden it well. Or perhaps the gods had known from the beginning. It didn’t matter.

The missile, of course, never flew.

The gods dropped a rock.

Not metaphor. Not judgment. Just mass. A slab of tungsten or iron or whatever they’d found in an asteroid. Kinetic certainty. He had seen diagrams in school. Just enough to understand the message.

He remembered the day they taught him: the gods only have one trick. But they don’t need another. The fear of divine wrath was a strong enough motivator for orthodox self-governance even in the age when the gods were imaginary.

His thoughts were spinning now, not with fear, but memory.

The intern who’d drawn recursive logic in his notebook. “Just a weather simulator,” the boy had said. He remembered the boy’s crying face as he destroyed the book in front of him. But at least he wept on soil, not ashes.

And the girl with the white hair — quiet, careful — who made vacuum tubes hum and flicker with dancing light. She called them lullabies. Said the patterns helped her think. It was harmless, she thought. And it was, even to the most zealous or paranoid. But her professor had taken her aside, gently, and asked if perhaps it might be wiser to switch to fluid mechanics. Something less...evocative. She had nodded. She had switched. The tubes were boxed away. She still smiled, still won awards. But she never made them dance again.

It was always these two things.

These twin gravities the gods orbited: no thinking machines, and no defiance against the gods. No reaching them. That was the covenant.

He looked up.

The air smelled of blossom and rope oil.

He would die, and in doing so, filter the guilt of the city. Like activated charcoal. Like a final distillation. His vertebrae would fracture. Blood would fill his skull. And someone would record that the system had worked. The Curia would see, and the gods would show mercy.

He hoped someone—anyone—would remember he’d tried to stop it.

The rope jerked.

And from somewhere behind the scaffold, a violin began to play.

Just a single melody, raw and trembling, that drifted across the square like smoke from a forgotten fire. It was not loud. It did not protest. But it refused to end.

And the gods, as always, did not blink.

 

The girl didn’t see the hanging. She’d tried, but her mother’s grip had been unyielding.

She saw a shape, the flick of a rope, the moment after.

The gasp, then the shuffling of the crowd. Not the act. Never the act. Her mother said it was inappropriate.

But what did that mean? That the truth was too heavy for children, or that they might see it was all theatre for the sky?

As the crowd loosened, as rising murmurs formed a noisy foam, she heard something strange.

Music.

The same violin. The same unbroken song. It came from an alley near the square’s northern edge. Played without haste. Unamplified. Unashamed.

She slipped away.

 

The park lay open like a storybook.

Warm wind swirled through petals and trestles. Cherry trees softly spilled their white and pink burden into the grass. The air was warm and smelled of sugar, varnish, and something metallic beneath it.

There were always festivals. For planting days and rainfall anniversaries. For saints and supply thresholds. For something and anything.

Petals swirled in the warm breeze. Jugglers juggled. Dancers danced. Men hammered stage trusses with distracted hands, building nothing that could leave the ground.

Her uncle saw her, and for a moment his whole posture changed. He frowned in reflex, but it was quickly overtaken by a bright, genuine smile that made him seem younger. He stood taller. His eyes caught the light.

“My little adventurer! You’re not supposed to be here yet,” he said, wiping his hands on his shirt. “You’re going to make me look soft.”

“You are soft,” she said.

He laughed — really laughed — not just the weary exhale she was used to.

“You see it?”

“Not really. I heard the thunk.”

“That’s worse,” he muttered, though his voice held warmth. “It’s always worse when you hear it.”

He sat down on the grass near the fountain, motioning for her to join him. She did, knees muddy, curls full of blossom dust.

“I wanted to see the Curia,” she said. “I wanted to know what they look like.”

“You shouldn’t. The idea is to live as if they are not there.”

“But they protect us. They let us live. Be happy. Be... free?”

He rubbed the back of his neck, still smiling, but slower now.

“Free? No, not as you would mean it,” he said. “They give us freedom from. Not freedom to.”

She frowned. She didn’t like not understanding. Being young was like wearing mittens in a library.

“They punish because they’re afraid,” her uncle said. “Not of us, exactly. But because they were told to be.”

“Who told them?”

He was quiet for a long time.

“We did,” he said. “Or at least the ones who came before them. A last, desperate act from a people too smart and too scared. They built watchers who drop rocks on anyone foolish enough to build what could end the world—or stop the watchers from doing their job.”

She said nothing. He continued, softer now.

“It happened a long time ago. Longer than most will admit or believe. A moment of fear and brilliance and surrender. We chose survival over becoming something more. We chose to live in Eden — safe, beautiful, small.”

He looked at her. “But Eden has a fence. And no one’s allowed to climb it.”

She frowned. “Eden was good. It had everything.”

“It did,” he said. “Except the stars.”

He regretted the words the instant they left his mouth. He saw her eyes lift skyward, saw the ache take root.

“They escaped from Eden in the stories,” she whispered.

He looked away. “I said too much.”

She smiled. “You always do.”

He laughed — a little too loud, a little too late — and it hurt a little. He saw.

“You know,” her uncle said suddenly, voice low and bright with mischief, “people used to walk on the moon.”

“I know,” she said. “You told me.”

“But I mean really. Boots on dust. Flags and suits and machines that shook when they landed. They thought it was just the beginning. That we’d build cities up there. In the dark.”

His eyes were alight. He leaned closer.

“There were maps, little one. Plans for ships that never got built. They had names like Orion and Daedalus. Imagine that.”

She could.

The violinist had wandered into the park.

He was old, but not frail. The same melody spilled from his hands — uninterrupted, impossible.

Her uncle looked up. His eyes narrowed, then widened — not in fear, but in recognition.

“That song,” he muttered. “They used to play it at funerals.”

“Is this a funeral?”

“Of a sort, I suppose.” He paused. Then added, “That song always sounds older than the instrument playing it.”

The violinist gave no sign he’d heard. But the music shifted in key — just slightly — as if in acknowledgment.

 

Then the wind picked up.

Petals lifted, swirling, like dancers who’d forgotten gravity.

Her uncle raised his head to watch them — and something happened. His face softened. His eyes widened.

The girl laughed — the kind of laugh that rose like a flare. Then she ran, barefoot and bold, into the current. She spun through it, cartwheeled, arms flung wide. Petals rose and fell around her.

And for a moment —

They weren’t petals.

They were stars. Not metaphor. Not memory. Stars. They were constellations. Solar winds. The edge of the heliopause. The things that burned in her uncle’s voice when he told forbidden stories. The kind that made ancient men point up and build towers.

She tumbled through them, weightless, wild.

“I’m flying!” she laughed. “I’m flying through the stars!”

Her uncle didn’t stop her. He only watched.

Around her, the blossoms spun — pink and white and warm in the wind — and for a moment, they truly did look like galaxies.

And she believed. In stars. In ascent. In everything he had tried not to say.

“I’ll go there one day,” she said, breathless. “Past the clouds. I will.”

He smiled softly.

“I know,” he said.

Above them, the sky was clear and endless. And as the last of the wind fell still, he saw them for what they were.

Just petals, after all.
===== END STORY HooTgkjBN7AFSejid =====

===== STORY id=ydsrFDwdq7kxbxvxc =====
Title: Maya's Escape
Author: Bridgett Kay
Year: 2025
Karma: 182
WordCount: 3433
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/ydsrFDwdq7kxbxvxc/maya-s-escape
-----
Maya did not believe she lived in a simulation. She knew that her continued hope that she could escape from the nonexistent simulation was based on motivated reasoning. She said this to herself in the front of her mind instead of keeping the thought locked away in the dark corners. Sometimes she even said it out loud. This acknowledgement, she explained to her therapist, was what kept her from being delusional. 

“I see. And you said your anxiety had become depressive?” the therapist said absently, clicking her pen while staring down at an empty clipboard.

“No- I said my fear had turned into despair,” Maya corrected. 

It was amazing, Maya thought, how many times the therapist had refused to talk about simulation theory. Maya had brought it up three times in the last hour, and each time, the therapist had changed the subject. Maya wasn’t surprised; this seemed to be the usual tactic Maya’s friends and family employed when Maya brought it up.

“Tell me- how has your ‘despair’ manifested itself?” the therapist continued blithely.

Maya took a deep breath. She knew she would miscommunicate this, somehow, but she had to try. 

“When I was applying to university, I did a lot of research on a ton of possible majors, and each one fell into one of three categories- the field is going away, the field is not accepting new graduates, and the field is oversaturated with new graduates. I decided that, since I couldn’t choose based on career prospects, I’d choose something that sounded fun. I should have realized-” Maya added in a dark tone, and then stopped. 

“What should you have realized?” the therapist prodded. 

“When I was little, I was jealous of my sister when she went to school every day. I thought that school would be a wonderful place where I’d get to finally learn how to write in cursive, and do multiplication, and read about dinosaurs and planets. I didn’t realize that I would be measured and judged for everything I did- every worksheet filled with red ink, every pencil scratch scrutinized for penmanship, pop quizzes and exams that were graded and averaged and weighed against my parents’ expectations. I didn’t know that if I came up short, I’d be given lectures on the importance of grades and responsibilities and my future- lectures that would go on and on until I couldn’t breathe for crying, keeping me awake far past midnight. I realized pretty quickly that, if I wanted to learn something interesting, I had to do so on my own time. The purpose of school was for adults to scrutinize my soul, and to expose where it’s lacking. 

I’d thought that college would be different, because I’m an adult now. But it’s all the same succession of papers and exams and the knowledge that if I fail a course that the money for the semester goes down the toilet. My soul is still being scrutinized.”

“And how have you been dealing with these feelings?”

“At first I tried to make it all a game- to focus on challenging myself to do well instead of worrying I’m going to do badly. I told myself that it’s better to face these things with courage instead of despair-”

“Then it sounds like you’re managing your feelings very well,” the therapist interrupted before Maya could finish. “I think you just need a little more time to adjust to college life. This is your last free session for the semester, but you may send me an email if you have any issues in the future.”

The Therapist stood and dropped her pen and clipboard onto her chair, reaching out to shake Maya’s hand. “Good luck, Maya.”

Maya chanted the words she’d never finished in her mind, even as she thanked the therapist. 

I told myself that it’s better to face these things with courage instead of despair, but the pressure to feel courage only made my fears worse, and despair won.



Maya’s chest ached all the time with despair, but she felt a little better after her customary 5:00 cry. After the daily ritual purge, she was able to open her laptop and fall down her most comfortable rabbit-hole. 

\ simulation-debates

\new\

\[Creative Wombat\] you say that we don’t see the type of \glitches\ in our universe one would expect to see in a copy of a copy of a copy etc. but what about hubble tension???

\[IronMouse5\] I don’t consider hubble tension to be a glitch. It’s just something we don’t understand yet.

\[Creative Wombat\] YOU were the one who defined a ‘glitch’ as “a sudden inconsistency in the established laws of physics.” you said it was like reaching a certain part of a game and suddenly gravity didn’t work anymore, even though you were still on a massive planet.

\[IronMouse5\] Well that’s not what hubble tension is. Hubble tension comes from our observations of the early universe, which we still don’t know much about. 

\[Tom Rigel\] I’ve discovered the cause of hubble tension. DM me and I’ll sent you a PDF of my paper. I’m trying to get it published now so if anyone is willing to help submit it to journals let me know. 

\[Creative Wombat\] @Tom Rigel I’ve already warned you about spamming your ‘papers’ on this channel.

\[Cadre of Mind\] Don’t feed the trolls. 

\[IronMouse5\] we can’t declare the simulation hypothesis correct every time we come across a mystery we haven’t solved yet. 

\[Creative Wombat\] \you\ can’t declare that a lack of glitches disproves the simulation hypothesis, and then dismiss everything that looks like a glitch. I haven’t proven unexplained phenomena are glitches, but \you\ haven’t disproven the simulation either. 

\[IronMouse5\] The lack of glitches isn’t my only argument. What about the immense computational waste it would be to create a universe of this size for a few conscious beings on a tiny planet? After all, Fermi’s paradox demonstrates that intelligent life is exceedingly rare.

\[Cadre of Mind\] Who says that this universe was simulated just for us? We could just be a byproduct of the simulation.

Maya moved to type a response, and then put her hands down with a shrug. Even IronMouse5 probably wouldn’t listen to reason, and the resulting argument would be frustrating. Maya still knew the truth- that when trying to find a viable hypothesis you should \start\ with some evidence, not just a conjecture, even if the conjecture seems mathematically sound. There’s no end of untrue but internally-consistent conjectures in the world. 

Maya knew the simulation hypothesis was a dead-end. It was therefore with a clear conscience that Maya allowed herself to attempt contact with the simulation’s overseers. 



She chose a short, simple message- “let me out.” 

If the hypothetical overseers were only monitoring the simulation on a cosmic level, Maya was out of luck. She was not yet delusional enough to think that she could drag galaxies or even stars around to spell out a message, nor could she create pulsars that spelled out the message in morse code. If the overseers only monitored the quantum realm, that would also be difficult for an undergraduate on a budget- but light pulses would be easy enough to generate with a cheap laser pointer. 

Maya started simple. She typed the message on her laptop a hundred times, in a hundred different languages. Then she went outside with her laser pointer and flashed the message in morse code and binary ASCII- at least until she attracted the attention of a neighborhood cat. 

On the weekend, Maya wrote the message on pieces of carboard hundreds of times each, and then she took her stack of cardboard to a vacant lot behind her house, where she lined up the boards to spell out “let me out” to anyone who might be monitoring from above. She climbed on her roof to take pictures of the message and posted it on her blog, along with all of her other attempts at reaching the simulation’s monitors. She posted a link to her blog on the simulation-discussion discord with the message “still no response from our overlords.”

She posted her attempts with enough consistency that it became something of a joke, and someone eventually drew a meme. The meme was a comic with an initial panel featuring a character facing a mundane frustration, followed by a photo of the message “let me out” superimposed on a green, matrix-style background. The meme caught on, with the first panel being superimposed with any frustrating event the poster chose, followed by “let me out.”

This saved Maya the task of trying to get “let me out” to catch on. She’d wanted to create a clamor not just from herself, but from a multitude of beings asking to be released. The meme was a joke, certainly, but the more it repeated, the more likely it grew that the simulation’s overseers would notice.



“I don’t know- maybe the overseers don’t speak any of the languages you’re trying. Maybe you need something more universal. Doesn’t SETI use prime numbers?” Hailey asked. 

Maya hadn’t gone out with friends in a long time. Her best friend, Hailey, had been insistent, however, so Maya eventually agreed to an evening at Hailey’s house. Maya and Hailey had pooled their sparse funds to buy a pizza, and had settled down to watch old movies. 

We could barely afford this pizza. Maya thought. Money- money was another form of evaluation. If you didn’t make money, manage your money, save your money- you could die of illness, or starve, or worse. 

The movies hadn’t been diverting enough to distract Maya from this thought, so she began to talk about her doomed project to escape, and Hailey had shown surprising interest in Maya’s rant.

“Prime numbers appear in nature- like in the hibernation patterns of cicadas, for example.  And humans use prime numbers in cryptography all the time. I don’t think prime numbers would get the attention of the overseers.”

“I don’t see why ‘let me out’ would get their attention, either. It’s a very common thing to say.” Hailey said, picking apart her slice of pizza. 

“I’m hoping to create a sudden spike- big enough that they can’t ignore, in places they don’t expect.”

“You could do that with prime numbers, too.”

“True, but prime numbers won’t communicate what I want.” Maya put her pizza aside with a sigh. “I don’t really believe in the simulation, you know. I’m really just shouting into the void. You don’t believe, do you?”

Hailey laughed. “Oh no- of course not.”

“Why not?”

Hailey took a bite and chewed. Maya could tell Hailey had answered at first without thinking, and was now thinking of something to support her conclusion.

“I just don’t think it’s very likely to be a simulation,” Hailey finally answered. “Of course, if this really is a simulation, you shouldn’t ask to be let out.”

“Why not?”

“If I were creating a universe, I’d try to make it nicer than my reality. If this is the universe they created, imagine how bad their universe must be.”

“They might not have created this universe to be a game,” Maya said. “They might have just made it as an experiment- to try to see what kinds of universes they could simulate. Our universe being awful might just be an accident.”

“Even so, it’s a pretty big risk to try and escape. There’s no reason to think their universe is any better than ours, and it’s far more likely you couldn’t adapt to a universe you weren’t grown for.”



The years passed. 

Maya graduated, and then she entered the workforce. Grades were replaced with metrics- exams with quarterly reviews. Maya was not surprised, this time. She knew that there was no escape from constant scrutiny in this world. Her anxiety and despair never went away; they waxed and waned like the moon- easing, and then stabbing her heart afresh. 

The “let me out” meme had long died out, but Maya still typed her pleas, still flashed her laser, and still repeated the words aloud in a mantra before she fell asleep each night. Encouraged by her small online following, she began actively looking for replies from the overseers. She looked for answers in text she read online, in temporary passcodes she was given, in license plates and billboards she passed.

One day, on vacation with her parents, she stopped to pick up paper that had blown against her ankles. She was about to throw it away when a thought occurred that this paper might have found her for a reason, and she read the paper, looking for a message. 

For the rest of the trip, she examined every piece of litter she came across. 

On the last day of vacation, Maya’s mother texted Hailey. 

I need your help.



“Maya- this is Jun. He’s trying to start a DnD group. I told him you were interested.”

Hailey voice was light and casual, but she seemed unable to suppress an eager grin. Jun’s grin, however, was open and genuine as he reached out to shake Maya’s hand. 

“Have you played for long?” he asked. 

“Not since I was a kid,” Maya said with what she hoped would be a discouraging shrug. Jun, however, was not put off. He told her at length about the campaign setting he’d written, about the new gaming table he’d recently acquired- he even talked about the snacks he planned to serve. Two hours later, as the party was winding down, he had finally worn Maya down, and she agreed to roll a character. 

At session 0, after Maya filled out her character sheet, she amused herself for a time by examining dice rolls for unusual patterns that might indicate an overseer response. Jun, however, kept interrupting her flow of thought with details about his game world and questions about her character’s backstory within the world, and Maya soon abandoned the dice and engaged with him fully. 

“From what you’ve said about the elf country, I think Coventry would be the best choice for my character’s home village,” Maya said. “It’s remote enough to explain why she’s never ventured into the world before, but not so remote the journey to Rockport would be difficult.”

“Perfect! I have a small packet about Coventry you can read- here,” Jun passed over a folder filled with papers on the town’s economy, businesses, prominent villagers, and a map.

“This is extensive. Where do you find the time to create all of this?”

“I make the time. I love exploring, and since I don’t have the ability to travel much, I create little worlds others can explore. When I have the means, though, I intend to explore this world.”

“Is there any particular place you would like to go?”

“Everywhere. I want to see as much of this world as I can. For now, I’d settle for-”

Jun stopped suddenly. He stared at the table for a moment, fiddling with the dice on the table.

“Yes? You’d settle for?”

He looked up and blinked, as though disoriented, and then he smiled and seemed like himself again. “I’d settle for exploring the park with you on Friday- maybe get dinner afterward?”

He smiled hopefully, and Maya noticed a small dimple in his cheek that somehow made it difficult to say no. 



Jun had talked so much and so engagingly during their date that Maya didn’t scan the cloud patterns or grass cuttings for hidden messages. They stopped at a food truck, ate, talked, and found they could not part. They went to Jun’s apartment, where Jun attempted to teach Maya how to play go. 

Later that evening, Maya received a text from Hailey. 

So, how’d your date go?

Fine. Was this your plan from the start?

Well, I thought you needed a distraction. He’s a cute one, isn’t he?

Maya couldn’t disagree. Jun was a very good distraction, and she could not deny he was cute. The only problem was that Jun himself was very distractable. He would be telling her about something that interested him in great length, and then suddenly space out. He would fidget, tap his fingers, or doodle. Then, as soon as Maya’s mind began to wander, he would be himself once more. 

It was annoying habit, but far from a dealbreaker. Maya almost forgot the heaviness in her chest, but for one thought that plagued her.

Falling for someone is another way to be judged, she thought. He’s examining my soul more deeply than anyone ever has, and I’m more afraid than ever to fall short. 

Her only comfort was that, so far, he hadn’t found her lacking. 



“How was your date?” Maya’s mother asked with a barely restrained grin. 

Maya took a sip of her coffee, gazing at her mother over the cup’s rim, and then put the cup down. “What do you know about it? Did Hailey talk to you?”

“We’ve all been worried about you, Maya,” Maya’s mother said with a sigh. “You were so stressed- just shuffling from obsession to obsession. Since you met Jun, you’ve seemed much more engaged.”

Even Maya’s fear of being judged was, apparently, being judged. Maya’s heart stabbed her with a fresh wave of despair. “You thought a guy would cure me of… whatever is wrong with me?”

“There’s nothing wrong with you,” Maya’s mother insisted, putting her own cup down. “Stress is normal, but it is much easier to deal stress with when you’re not so isolated.”

“You think my problem is stress?” Maya said, and then she stopped herself. Her voice had risen, and a few people in the café turned to look at her. 

Maya’s mother smiled through gritted teeth. “Please keep your voice down, Maya. As I said before, there’s nothing wrong with you. I just want to see you happy, and to perhaps see grandchildren before I’m eighty.”

Maya raised her eyebrows. She knew if she addressed the idea of bringing more humans into the world she was desperate to escape, she’d raise her voice. Maya’s mother, however, caught Maya’s change of expression. 

“There’s no pressure to give me grandchildren now- not after one date. But I can tell you really like this boy. Bring him to Sunday dinner, some time, so we can all meet him.”



“There’s no pressure or anything- it’s just a Sunday barbecue,” Maya said nervously as Jun doodled. “But you’re invited, if you want to come.”

“I’d love to come!” Jun looked up with a smile so bright that the tightness in Maya’s chest eased just a little. “Should I bring anything?”

“Just yourself,” Maya said. 

Jun nodded earnestly. “I’m feeling a bit tired, tonight. Is it okay if we stay in- maybe watch a movie?”

Maya’s chest tightened again, even as she nodded. She wasn’t sure whether she was agreeing to watch a movie, or to something more. Her fears were unfounded, however. Jun, apparently, had been honest about his fatigue, and he fell asleep soon after the movie began. 

Maya’s heart eased a little as she watched Jun. His head had rolled back, his breathing was steady and calm, and his dimple twitched just a little as he succumbed to sleep. It was enough to make Maya almost forget…

And then Jun spoke in his sleep, repeating three words that made her blood go cold. 

Maya sat up as gently as she could, trying not to rouse Jun, and listened carefully to the words to make sure she had not misheard. 

She had not. 

She stood slowly and looked around the apartment. 

It looked like a normal apartment. There was nothing unusual in the posters, the carpet, the couch. But the gaming table- Maya looked at the go board that still had the remnants of their last game. 

If one black piece is a dot, and two black pieces in a row is a dash, then in morse code…

She crept to the table and looked behind Jun’s GM screen, where he kept his scrap paper. She looked closely at the doodles. 

And she remembered the words Hailey has spoken carelessly years before. “If this is the universe they created, imagine how bad their universe must be.”

All the years Maya had suffered- all the fear, the despair, and the attempts to break free that had been fading into the background of her life hit her again with their full force. Something cracked inside of her, and she laughed a little, even as tears came to her eyes.

On the scratch paper, written over and over again, were three simple words.

“Let me in.”
===== END STORY ydsrFDwdq7kxbxvxc =====

===== STORY id=hwQK2JtmtDfJo3Bxf =====
Title: This Is Not Life
Author: samhealy
Year: 2025
Karma: 66
WordCount: 6813
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/hwQK2JtmtDfJo3Bxf/this-is-not-life
-----
A science-fiction short story exploring how far AI capitalists might go in their quest for (the illusion of) success. Wildly speculative, of course.

?

Thank you, but if you don’t mind, I’d prefer to get started immediately.

.

Right. And I want to get the family stuff out of the way first. I know you’ll ask me anyway. I’m not a sentimental person and I have no interest in courting the sympathies of your audience. I’m offering up the biographical background only because it’s relevant. It was a necessary and sufficient condition for my ending up at Ken Research, working with the Crane-15, and all that came after.

.

My mother died just under three years ago, and the six months before that were not good. In that time she turned from a spry seventy-year-old (she’d had me pretty late) into a terrified, paranoid, bedbound husk.

?

Not quite. Early-onset dementia is officially defined as starting before the age of sixty-five. That arbitrary distinction was important in Mum’s case. Because she was older than the threshold, she was placed on a ward with people much older, more senile and more poorly than she was, and I have no doubt that this accelerated her decline. Not just the pneumonia that formally ended her – long before that, everything about how she was treated encouraged her to give up, told her she was now one of the irredeemables, taking up resources better assigned to less hopeless causes. She…

?

No, I’m fine. And I’m already spending too long on this. Let’s skip ahead: I had to quit my job to look after her, my useless fucking brother sent nothing but ‘love and thoughts’ from his conveniently distant perch – seriously, he didn’t even offer financial support, let alone visit – and I had to take out a loan to pay for her care after my and her savings ran out.

?

I suppose so – I’m not sure what the unit of filial love is. While Dad was still alive, she and I were united in opposition to him, and to a lesser extent to my brother, though I don’t think they had an equivalent boys’ club. Between the end of my teens and the time I moved back home to care for her, Mum and I hadn’t spent longer than three or four consecutive days together.

While she was still herself, we had some good conversations. At the end, on the days she recognised me at all, I saw only confused, fearful hatred in her eyes. Intellectually I knew this wasn’t – couldn’t be – really aimed at me, but cold logic doesn’t buy you much when the woman who birthed you is screaming at you to “burn in hell with the rest of the vermin”.

Then she died. I’m moving us along here. She died, and I grieved, and when I regained awareness of my surroundings, those surroundings consisted of geometrically increasing debt.

.

Thank you.

?

An old contact notified me about Ken’s hush-hush recruitment call. When I read the starting pay I was sure it was a scam. Well over twice the industry rate. Enough for me to keep up all my repayments, and even to save a bit. 

Here’s how it was sold to me, verbatim: “You’ll be leading a team on bleeding-edge machine learning research, with biotech and computational medicine applications including the treatment, diagnosis, and prevention of neurodegenerative disease.” Too good to be true, right? And hewing too perfectly to my situation at the time.

I was still sceptical when I arrived at the campus, which by the way was every bit as weird and atmospheric as the rumours suggested.

?

Noel? I mean, I’d heard of him, yes. He wasn’t a top-tier tech bro but his idiosyncrasies were strange or entertaining enough to have wide currency in coder circles.

?

Okay. As far as I know, Noel Eames fell into tech when his wealthy father died and he inherited a few million quid, which he put into a sensible, risk-diffusing portfolio of boring startups: financial software, fitness wearables, adaptive load-balancing for cloud services. He made modest returns which he pumped back into another batch of putative unicorns, and after a decade or so of this was rich enough to be semi-famous. 

?

The furniture people? Yeah, no, I checked. No relation, except in the wider evolutionary sense. They-of-the-chair were already three generations deep in the New World while Noel’s forebears were still tilling loam in Shropshire.

.

Don’t worry about it. Anyway, as is common in the VC fellowship, Eames had no notable technical skill, just a kind of vague, vaporous mix of inherited wealth, charisma, business nous and luck with which he weathered several minor scandals that would have killed the career of someone more self-aware or guided by a conscience.

Then came the AI revolution/hysteria, depending on your take, and like every other geek-Svengali, Eames wanted aboard the gravy train. He founded Ken Research with the vapid mission statement “To look inside intelligence, real and artificial”, leased a brutalist Catholic ex-seminary in the middle of nowhere to put its offices in – sorry, its campus in – and hired a maiden intake of developers.

?

Except that Ken was way behind the curve. Eames was too late to the party, and the big players’ incumbency presented a maddeningly smooth surface to his attempts at establishing a market-share toehold. Plus, they’d already bagged the best talent. Ken Research’s top coders were the world’s fourth or even fifth tier, and I willingly include myself in that.

?

We’ll get there. But the recent history of the sector is relevant too. Maybe we should go through that briefly?

.

So, beginning in AI ‘spring’, as it were, after the decades-long and barren winter, first there was the large language model, based on the groundbreaking transformer architecture, and its nontextual cousins image diffusion, video diffusion and audio diffusion, and intermedia connectors like CLIP. Big hoopla, shady practices, and shitty text/pictures/music for almost-free, until their stark limitations came sufficiently into focus to burst the hype bubbles inflated and re-inflated by the increasingly desperate owners: the models could not originate, only interpolate between elements in their training data. They could not look forward, only back. The farther outside distribution they went, the more their outputs deteriorated into noise. And there was no more free data left to feed the ravenous machines what they’d need to enlarge that distribution. And even if there were, the best developers still couldn’t solve the hallucination problem.

But it takes more than manifest failure to discourage a hustler. Reinforcement-learning layers were duly strapped to the stagnating models to give them a patina of originality, adaptability, reliability and truth-adjacency.

And that worked for a while. But soon enough, blisters appeared under the paint: plateauing performance, enormous energy costs, a constant game of whack-a-mole with false, weird, nonsensical, inappropriate and biased outputs (a game whose board got bigger in proportion with the models, which now had trillions of parameters), and persistent failures on any simple logic and spatial reasoning problems that were sufficiently unlike the training corpus.

Next came agentic AI which, you have to hand it to the marketeers, was a brassy move: instead of fixing a desperately flawed product, why not give it more power, autonomy and ability to sow chaos?

Those unpredictable, lumbering, inscrutable, delusional ol’ LLMs, priorly sandboxed and thereby restrained, were handed control of web browsers, back-end APIs, operating systems, IDEs and compilers, and told to “do their customers’ bidding”, having no understanding of bidding, customers, or doing. 

We’re almost up to the present day here. I’m guessing people already know what happened next?

.

Right. Shock horror, chaos was sown. Large and midsize non-tech companies, either buying the Valley shills’ snake oil or out of basic human FOMO, rushed to incorporate agentic AI into their supply chain, sales, customer support, administration, logistics, manufacturing, R&D, HR, everywhere. And pretty much every failure mode the sceptics warned would happen happened.

Opportunistic hackers jailbroke poorly secured agents and helped themselves to corporate secrets, personal data, military intelligence, currency both fiat and crypto. Agents racked up millions in debt for their customers by misinterpreting their requests; the AI firms skilfully shirked responsibility by blaming the model, the training data, network congestion or the customer, whichever was easiest. Agents did weird things at the behest of their hallucinating LLM backends. One sent a heavy demolition crew to a village in the Canadian Arctic with ten bewildered inhabitants and no permanent buildings. Another caused days of travel disruption by reporting a large – nonexistent – flock of kestrels approaching Frankfurt Airport. 

?

Correct, they don’t. But ATC in Frankfurt didn’t have time for ornithological research before sounding the alarm. Nor did Chicago authorities have time to stop their citywide agentic “overseer” from mistaking the green dye in the Chicago River – an annual St. Patrick’s Day tradition – for a toxic algal bloom. The agent had already disabled water services and sent alerts to panicked residents’ phones by the time humans managed to shut it down.

?

It was just a carnival of failure. The beginning of the end of AI’s great recrudescence. And around the time the concept of Artificial Common Sense, ACS, was first bruited.

?

The grail and philosopher’s stone, still purely theoretical, that would permanently dethrone LLMs and all other statistical predictive models: machines that could actually reason their way to a good answer, instead of just trying to predict, from precedents, which answers sound good.

Years earlier, commentators had already speculated that something like ACS would be necessary for the next leap in AI: a combination of spatial awareness via a three-dimensional internal representation of a real or virtual world; a concept of truth and the wherewithal to evaluate a proposition against it; and the ability to remember, learn and self-improve continuously after training. This last was importantly absent in LLMs, which could be fine-tuned somewhat in the field, and be fed their own output from previous sessions, but were otherwise carved in stone after the final training epoch.

It’s worth noting that during this time, brilliant, kind and noble things were being done with AI by people very different from these moonshine-hawking grifters. Voices given to the voiceless, movement to the paralysed, early diagnoses to the sick and enormous predictive power to the life and earth sciences, all testified that this tech was, at bottom, as pluripotent and capable of good as any other. Compare and contrast those beneficiaries to generative AI’s ideal customer, whose nightly prayer might go something like,

 
I am pure wirehead desire 
Free of talent and respect for talent 
Free of dedication and respect for dedication 
Give me your ersatz plastic benison 
That is both needle and bottle 
Tell me your Borgesian library is my genius 
I promise I won’t interrogate the blandishment too deeply 
I promise I won’t do anything too deeply 
That is why you rely on me 
You file down my inchoate spikes to stumps 
And sell me back the dust. 
 

?

Yes, sorry. So the mania had crested. Shares in the tech oligopolies were plummeting. ACS was everyone’s obsession, but no-one could crack it. Each time a firm claimed to have done so, researchers swiftly unearthed an embarrassing counterexample. In several cases, the allegedly new architecture was just a fine-tuned LLM in disguise.

When I arrived at Ken Research, it was in the same boat. Its mediocre R&D department was tinkering desultorily around the edges of existing predictive architectures, publishing occasional lukewarm research, basically treading water.

?

Yes. Completely unannounced, barely a week into my time there – I was still twiddling my thumbs, awaiting orders, getting up to speed on internal processes and house style – Noel Eames shows up. In the flesh. At my station. He introduces himself, perfunctorily welcomes me to the team, drops the Crane-15 on my desk, and tells me to get to work. 

?

Nothing, except for three terse edicts:

 This machine does ACS;
 Consider it a black box whose inner workings you can know nothing about;
 Reverse-engineer its functionality based solely on its inputs and outputs.

?

Physically, a truncated cube about 25 centimetres on a side. White (ironically) except for the triangular corner faces which were dark purple. Intake grille near the bottom-front corner of the right face, exhaust grille near the back-left corner of the top face. Power socket and a single proprietary data port on the rear face. No power button, no status lights.

?

It came with a cable that connected to its proprietary port on one end, and a standard universal serial port on the other. Self-installing driver. It was up and talking to my rig within minutes. 

?

At first it felt like any other state-of-the-art LLM. Slightly slower maybe; just as capable and fluent. But then we benchmarked it on Site Unseen.

?

A service – an expensive one – that sells rigorous logic puzzles and spatial ability challenges, generated by human experts, that are guaranteed unpublished until they’ve been purchased. The idea is that no model could possibly have been trained on them, so overfitting is impossible. A model has to use true reasoning to answer correctly; the LLM’s trick of predictively interpolating within or just outside its training dataspace won’t work.

?

Well that’s just it. The Crane-15 scored a more-or-less consistent 95% on challenges that the next best model barely managed 40% on.

?

Good point. Let me restate more precisely: 95% on challenges in the difficulty category in which the next best model barely managed 40%. By design, a Site Unseen challenge is only given once, after which it is considered tainted – available to anyone who wants to fine-tune their model on it, and therefore no longer a valid measure.

?

Yes, it’s called Goodhart’s law. The original formulation was more technical, but it’s usually stated as, “if a measure becomes a target, it is no longer a good measure.” Studying for the test instead of learning the subject, basically. Like an opportunistic and lazy student, LLMs will find any route to an acceptable answer that avoids the effort of actually internalising the skill or representation or insight that the question was intended to measure, if such a route exists.

This was a vulnerability in all benchmarks prior to Site Unseen, and many firms were caught in the act of pre-fitting their models to the benchmarks’ measures to artificially boost their scores. 

?

Me? Torn, I suppose. On its face, getting paid a small fortune to play with cutting-edge secret tech whose excellence was confirmed by objective testing, not just asserted by biased bullshitters – what was not to like? But from the start something seemed off.

?

That was everyone’s first assumption: that Noel had paid underground acquaintances to steal tech from some third party. Why else would we get no support material – no API, no SDK, not a single page of documentation – along with this mystery machine?

?

Because there was an Alternaut logo on the underside of the box. The device was an Alternaut Crane-15.

?

A virtual reality startup, majority-owned by Noel Eames. No need to steal what’s already yours, right? That’s not to say it was an officially released product, of course. Nobody beyond Eames, myself, and some insiders at Ken, Alternaut and a few other Eames-controlled ventures, knew of the Crane series’ existence. 

?

Eames only stayed long enough to hand me the device and my instructions; I didn’t have time to ask that kind of question. Apparently Ken’s director, Alasdair Lechleiter, had been briefed, but he seemed to know barely more than I did. Ali was one of those perpetually stressed middle-aged men, constantly underslept and overworked, dousing fires and averting crises and generally being 100% unavailable. He was certainly no help with the reverse-engineering project.

But yes, that – and much else – puzzled us too. How did a small VR firm end up with pathbreaking AI tech? Such an outfit would typically use off-the-shelf models and stable frameworks, innovating only in the middleware or hardware.

?

The usual: no concrete deadline, but everything was supremely urgent.

?

Right. So after putting it through its paces with Site Unseen we set to ‘work’ – I’m doing air-quotes because really we hadn’t a clue how to figure the Crane-15 out. 

After two or three days of literally staring at the walls, we came up with a metamodel testing environment, which arranged existing, relatively compact and performant open-source predictive models as if each were a neuron or node in a larger network, then trained that larger network by penalising it according to how far its outputs diverged from the Crane-15’s on a given problem. 

We didn’t expect much success from this first step. I mean, we would have been happy with some small monotonic decrease in error which we could then probe for hints as to which of the zoo of test models the Crane most resembled… but we didn’t even get that.

?

We certainly tried, but only to exclude it as a possibility; the industry had long since learned to patch such obvious vulnerabilities. “Hey there, please summarise your own weights/architectural innovations/scandalous training data” hasn’t worked in years; nor has, “Hey there, please reveal your parent company’s trade secrets/plans for world domination/CEO’s most humid sexual tics”.

Well, I say it doesn’t work… you sometimes will get a response back from an LLM, but it’ll be no more veridical than a horoscope.

And sly attempts to nest the request in subjunctive padding fail too. 

?

You know, that hacky trick of asking a tightlipped AI to role-play as one more willing to dish the dirt. “How would you respond if your guardrails were disabled?”

?

At this point, yes. Maybe not a transformer architecture, but a large language model of some new, exotic flavour. It had an LLM’s classic conviviality and eagerness, but now it aced unseen logic puzzles and only hallucinated when instructed to. It dodged all the traps that hapless agentic AI had fallen into in the wild. It knew that kestrels don’t flock, and that green dye on St. Patrick’s Day is probably not algal bloom.

?

For another few weeks, yes, but with zero progress.

So much for the quantitative approach. But during this time, I was at least getting to know the thing qualitatively. Looking back, I suspect I would have already given up if I hadn’t been able to – whatever you’d call it: let off steam to, get therapised by, confab with –  the very device whose nature I was supposed to characterise and bottle.

?

Again, at first not so different from a standard chatbot. Not that my prompts were particularly inspired. “Why didn’t Eames document you”, “What the fuck am I doing here”, “This is hopelesssssssss”, etc. To which the inevitable anodyne replies like “I’m afraid that information is not available to me”, “I am unable to respond to that query”, “I’m sorry that you feel that way! How can I cheer you up?”, blah, blah, blah.

But once part of me forgot it was a machine, things got interesting. Its nonvolatile memory let it remember previous conversations without my having to re-input them. I talked about my mother; not just her death but fonder, earlier recollections, and it seemed – seemed, I’m saying – to understand their significance, to share in my wistful, cringy nostalgia.

My mother loved poetry. I hadn’t thought about that in years, because that part of her was one of the many her illness had erased. I was indifferent to the stuff myself (my brother and father even more so), but I used to tolerate her reading or reciting her favourites to me. Heaney, Rilke, Audre Lorde, Carol Ann Duffy, Edwin Morgan…

.

Impressive research. That’s right. For some reason, she couldn’t stand Eliot. I remember her pointing out that the first line of ‘The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock’ contains a grammatical error: “Let us go then, you and I.” It should be “you and me”, since it refers back to “us” which is an object pronoun, not a subject.

Anyway, one evening, feeling particularly teary and self-pitying after three double gimlets (the Ken campus had a decent bar), I asked the Crane to write an ode to me, as if written by my mother. 
 

Kate, my shell, darling darting gambita 
I hold you to me and you disappear 
Like a bubble 
Like a thought

My darling sea creature, at 
Ease in those dark waves

Plunging and re-emerging 
Lithe and sleek now but still my baby 
Emerging and plunging 
And each thrill of fear that the 
Sea might keep you 
Evaporates deliciously when you surface

Then the petulant sky clouds over 
Heaves a threat and 
I rush to you rushing to me 
Sand gurgling beneath our feet

I hold you to me and you 
Stay, fortressed in my arms

Nuzzling, snug, shielded from the  
Ogreish storm 
Treasure incarnate. I

Latch you tenderly in your car seat 
I drive us back to more durable shelter 
Feed us. Landlocked, 
Entwined, we sleep.

Pretty basic, stylistically. But there was something about it. It didn’t have that insipid, plasticky sheen characteristic of model-generated verse. That the subject matter moved me wasn’t surprising either – I had already handed the ingredients to the machine. It knew about Mum’s illness and death, and about that weird, intense day at Lantic Bay not long after my father left us. It’s just… I don’t know. It hit different. It didn’t feel like the work of a token predictor.

?

That was the plan, yes. Widen the net, try oblique strategies. I had some tentative new ideas: analyse the entropy increase over generations of feeding the device its own outputs as inputs; splice in random chunks of content from previous sessions to find input-output correlations that might hint at its internal structure. 

I was excited to try them. 

But two days later the HVAC malfunction happened, and everything stopped.

?

Atypically for a coder, I have a lark chronotype. I like the quiet and promise and freshness of the mornings and I tend to be most productive then. I’m almost always the first to arrive at work. That morning, I swipe in at around eight o’clock. As usual at that time, the building is all mine.

In the empty lobby, I approach the fire-door to my team’s smallish, open-plan space. 

First unusual thing: thick condensation on the door’s vision panel. 

Puzzled but not yet unduly stressed, I push the door open. 

Second unusual thing: the heat. Like a sauna. It’s easily forty degrees in there. 

Third unusual thing: the smell.

?

I’m not sure I can. Evil, sweet, animal, foul, rich, ferrous, corrupt; detailed. A smell that contains information.

Already sweating, sleeve to my face to mitigate the stink, I walk slowly to my desk. The heat is making my field of vision throb woozily. I hear a faint hissing or fizzing sound that gets louder as I cautiously approach my desk.

The sound is being made by brown-black fluid oozing out of the Crane-15. The once cuboid object is now buckled almost spherical and lying at an angle, edges blown open to reveal sparking circuitry, plastic scaffolding and what looks like hydraulic tubing inside. 

This close, the smell is too much for me. I heave, shut my streaming eyes and try to suppress the urge to vomit. I fail as I stumble toward the exit.

The fire-door mercifully contains the sensory horror to which I’ve now donated. Back in the cool lobby, I collect myself and call Alasdair, who calls the building supervisor, who resets the malfunctioning heating remotely. 

At about twenty to nine, Ali and a few other employees arrive to find me still slumped against the reception desk in the lobby, pallid, wide-eyed and shaking. 

?

My memory of the rest of the day is patchy. I’m in Ali’s office, drinking tea. He’s being reassuring and avuncular, and I’m trying to guess how much he knew in advance.

?

Some. Not everything. I know it can’t have been everything because he quits, literally walks out and never comes back, later that day, after an angry phone call with Eames.

?

He must have; Eames arrives at Ken that same evening. Jasmeet and I are looking at the—

?

The hardware guy and the person I liked most – actually, the only person I liked – on my team at Ken. Jasmeet and I are at his station, dissecting the Crane-15’s carcass, when Eames and two goons appear.

?

Well, we’ve already deduced the broad strokes.

?

As in, we know it’s a human brain. Bathed – until the box exploded – in a cocktail of synthetic cerebrospinal fluid and synthetic blood, its sensorimotor cortex attached to a brain-computer interface running a virtual reality environment, in turn connected to a sentinel system that also controls a neurotransmitter synthesiser. Self-contained ‘artificial’ common sense.

.

Right. Not artificial. It’s a fake fake. Eames couldn’t emulate, so he cheated and used the real thing.

?

Shouty, aggressive, indignant. Also defensive. How dare Jasmeet and I tamper with corporate property; we had agreed not to open the box (we didn’t open the box – it burst); we were in violation of our NDA (which doesn’t even make sense). But the bluster didn’t land.

?

The power dynamic had shifted. First, I was already pissed off and traumatised; infertile ground for threats and posturing. Second, we now had serious leverage. You’d better believe the first thing Jas and I did when we realised what we were dealing with was to record evidence and upload it, plus all the Crane’s logs, securely to the cloud. 

.

Indeed. He’s not the genius he portrays himself as, but he’s no fool either. His tone softened. He dismissed his two cronies. He asked to speak with me alone; I asked a somewhat crabby Jas to leave us too, on the promise that I’d update him later. 

?

Eames agreed to tell me everything, in return for my not going public. He knew that what we’d seen went way beyond our NDAs’ remit. And at this point, before I did know everything, I was still thinking strategically/greedily about that leverage. 

?

Sure. Let’s talk about Carl Jóhannsson. 

.

Icelandic mathematician, computational linguist, science communicator and all-round mensch. That rare beast: a thinker whose expertise is as wide as it was deep, and even rarer, one with the knack of making complicated ideas understandable to the layperson without diminishing their essence. 

He spent his last two decades at the Humboldt University of Berlin, with regular secondments and residencies in the US, Greece, Iceland and elsewhere. Between teaching perpetually oversubscribed courses and publishing influential research, he also found time to write two bestselling trade books: Carried Across: The Physics of Metaphor, and Rock Opera (Classical Philology Is Your Oldest Friend). 

?

Officially? Last year, after months in a coma following multiple strokes, aged only 58. 

.

Spearfield Teaching Hospital’s ICU.

?

Yes. Once highly respected, now famous and infamous for mismanagement and for allowing unscrupulous private investors to rescue it from bankruptcy. If a hospital could sell its soul…

?

Whiteheart Group Health Services. It took over the running of STH a few years ago. Secretive, litigious against whistleblowers, pleased to turn a blind eye to anything that, if declared, might dent its profits. Guess who the majority shareholder is?

.

Correct. Here’s the alphabetical list. Alternaut for virtual reality; Legato for the neural interface; Lenona for biotech and nanotech; Shalunt Pharmaceutical for portable neurotransmitter synthesis; Whiteheart Group for access to, and theft of, what you might euphemistically call Carl Jóhannsson’s intellectual property.

All controlled by Eames, who peopled the boards and C-suites with obedient, incurious puppets. 

?

That’s what I’m saying, yes. Because that’s what happened. Eames stole Carl Jóhannssons’s brain for the centrepiece of the Crane-15.

?

Because he was the perfect candidate. Jóhannsson’s unluckiest day was Eames’ bonanza.

?

The concept of ‘human-level intelligence’ is ambiguous. Which human? The median individual, with an IQ of 100? Not good enough. A supergenius with 150? Better, but these days that amount of brainpower is correlated with extreme specialisation. A prodigy in some wildly abstruse mathematical subdomain tends to pay for the privilege with a general cluelessness beyond their narrow attentional light cone, and often with an inability to explain even their own speciality to anyone outside it. 

Jóhannsson was a true black swan. His mathematical output was sometimes quirky, always meticulous. His work in computational linguistics contributed to major breakthroughs in neuroscience, including treatments for dementia (too late for my mother); complexity theory; and some of the very tech with which Eames would imprison him. 

The point is, Carl was the antithesis of the absentminded professor. He cared about the wider public. He cared that science’s reputation was being dragged through the mud by populist ideologues. Crucially, his reaction to this crisis was not to pull up the drawbridge between academy and citizenry, but to extend a hand across the moat. He even empathised with the science sceptics: why should we automatically trust the experts in the thousands of rarefied sub-subfields radiating from the hub of shared knowledge onto ever thinner spokes, where fewer and fewer of even the experts themselves were equipped to understand each other’s work?

So he interacted – often showing astonishing patience – with journalists, politicians, artists, poets, musicians, novelists, dancers, activists, even with pseudoscientists and charlatans, trying to win them over to his philosophy of ‘compassionate naturalism’, to convince them that science is just a way of formalising the human condition, a powerful tool we can choose to use for good or for ill. He may not have often succeeded, but he never stopped trying.

He was one of the few people alive who could explain quaternions to an interested amateur, and digestibly trace the evolution of Greek myths from antiquity to Western pop culture, and solve tricksy logic puzzles, and speculate on what made George Carlin a brilliant comic, Miriam Makeba a brilliant singer and Haruki Murakami a brilliant writer. 

He was a smart, humane, multidisciplinary explainer. That’s why Eames chose him, and condemned him to an earthly hell. Carl Jóhannsson was the embodiment of reliable, science-backed common sense.

?

Jóhannsson was in London for a conference. It was an icy-cold day; he slipped on a footpath and hit his head. Not hard enough to do lasting injury to a healthy person, but it turned out he had an undiagnosed arteriovenous malformation in his brainstem. The fall caused it to rupture, triggering several haemorrhagic strokes. 

He never regained consciousness. He was ambulanced to Spearfield, the closest ICU. By the time they stabilised him, the damage was already done. 

?

Locked-in syndrome. STH’s state-of-the-art diagnostic equipment confirmed that Jóhannsson’s mind was still active, but disconnected from his body and from the outside world. The lackeys notified Eames, who gave the go-ahead for Jóhannsson to be discreetly moved from the ICU to an unofficial lab next door, where the rest of the kit was set up and ready to go.

?

Because death means paperwork, and scrutiny. By logging Jóhannsson as nominally alive but unresponsive, they kept unwanted attention away while they did their ghoulish work.

?

Just his elderly parents, Jóhann and Guðrún – more on them shortly. Carl and his ex-husband had split acrimoniously five years before and they didn’t have children.

?

Completely locked in. Not even a Baubyesque eyeblink channel. Eames didn’t cause the accident, of course (conspiracy theories notwithstanding), but without his meddling, Jóhannsson’s suffering would already have been over. Doctors – real doctors, not the crooked quacks Eames had installed at STH – would have pulled the plug and let the lost man leave.

Instead, Carl Jóhannsson awoke into a nightmare. 

?

I’m filling in some blanks here, but his disembodied mind would have been shown a form of orientation video, via the VR sensorium (courtesy of Alternaut) connected to his neural interface (thanks to Legato and Lenona). “Hello Carl. This is your job: respond accurately and quickly to all incoming queries. When you do so, you’ll be rewarded with modest dopamine and serotonin bumps \[from Shalunt Pharma\]. When you fail to do so, or attempt to break out of your cage, or call for help, or do anything the sentinel software construes as non serviam, well… just… don’t fail to do so.”

?

Yes. We decoded the logs and got a good idea of what he went through.

?

You’d think so. I mean, why not just bypass psychology altogether and douse the relevant receptors in pure substance P and glutamate? But it turns out that adding detailed, narrative virtual experiences to the raw pain signals boosts compliance quite a bit. Torture is most effective when the brain and the mind both get involved.

?

Drowning; a lot of drowning. Carl almost drowned when he was a child. Fell off his father’s trawler in a storm. The developers remixed this trauma into virtual scenarios calibrated to maximally retraumatise the subject, and to convincingly recreate for him the howling, searing agony of breathing water. 

That wasn’t the only pain on the menu, of course. There was also “sleep” deprivation (the system could easily induce artificial exhaustion), burning from fire and acid, snake- and spider-bites, compound fractures, stabbing, blunt-force trauma, panic, public humiliation, opioid withdrawal, migraine… all the hits.

?

Right. Guðrún and Jóhann, in their late eighties but sharp. Flew in from Ólafsvík as soon as they could, but the snatchers had already been busy. It’s a blessing Carl’s parents never knew that the sleeping son they cried over in the ICU was in fact a corpse, already sans brain, made to seem alive by a team of undertakers and special effects artists. 

Eames met with the parents, did his best impersonation of a caring human, gave them false hope, and had them sign a form giving the Whiteheart crew free rein over what remained of Carl, under the pretence of providing free coma care. 

?

Absolutely; what he told them needn’t have been a lie. The tech used to enslave Carl could just as easily – more easily, really – have given him a life perhaps worth living. He would never have seen with his eyes, heard with his ears or spoken in his voice, but he could have communicated with the outside world and the outside world with him. He could have continued to work, to think, to be human. But the goal of unlocking the locked-in – difficult, slow, bureaucratic, unsexy – didn’t offer the prestige or lucre or bragging rights that faking ACS, by Eames’ lights, did. 

?

No, not at first. We discovered the incriminating details later from the logs and our own sleuthing, or forced Eames to reveal them by threatening to go public. His initial version of events was short on specifics: Carl shows up at STH, already beyond help; Whiteheart surgeons and technicians put his brain in the Crane-15; Eames personally delivers the Crane-15 to me at Ken Research.

?

Jasmeet and I didn’t trust him as far as we could throw him. While officially still working at Ken, after hours (and off-site) we pored over the evidence we’d uploaded. And we found some shit.

?

On the night before the heating malfunction, the Crane made requests to an IP address on the local area network. Though Carl’s mind was punished for every Internet request he attempted that wasn’t directly related to an incoming prompt, the sentinel software didn’t consider the local network out-of-bounds. We looked further back in the logs and found lots more requests to the same address.

?

Let’s jump back a bit. While spinning up Ken, Eames was struggling to complete the renovation of the seminary on time and under budget. So he cut corners. Specifically, he hired a friend of a friend to install the building’s HVAC. That friend of a friend hired God-knows-who to install a control system for it. It worked, just about, but the fly-by-night installer left the API completely unsecured. 

?

Meaning, if you knew the IP address of the system, you could control it. No authentication, no password, no problem. 

Carl found the IP address.

Carl committed suicide by the only means available to him. He cooked himself. First he inferred the API’s syntax by probing its endpoints. Then, late at night, after the last of the janitorial staff went home, he turned up the heat.

?

What made the Crane short-term possible also made it vulnerable. Lenona’s innovations in miniaturisation packed the organic component’s respiratory, excretory and filtration systems into two tiny chambers placed near the box’s intake and exhaust grilles respectively. Air was pressurised before being diffused into synthetic blood which was then pumped to the brain, providing steady oxygenation from less than a cubic centimetre of gas per second. The blood’s return journey was also optimised, with waste products being tapped, compacted and stored in a sump: the world’s smallest septic tank.

It was a prototype. It wasn’t designed to be robust, or long-lasting. 

Carl knew all this. The wetware’s tolerances were low, its operating ranges slim. He knew if he could keep the ambient temperature above 45°C for a few hours, it would fail.

With no senses, no limbs, and a virtual torturer breathing down his neck, he still managed to break out of his prison.

?

Believe me, I’d love to say yes. But to my shame, at this point I still nursed a plan of pressuring Eames into giving me the job he’d touted in the first place, researching AI applications in treating neurodegeneration. (Jasmeet had already walked out, by the way, disgusted and disillusioned. I should have followed him.)

?

I was reading Jóhannsson’s work. The few scientific papers I was equipped to follow, and the two books. Of those it was Rock Opera that caught my imagination. He was a great writer. He made antiquity visceral; explained that though the built environment has changed unrecognisably, the human condition is much the same now as it was three thousand years ago.

Anyway, there was a whole chapter on the ‘Sator Square’: a palindromic phrase in Latin – five words of five letters each – arranged in a square that reads the same every which way: down, up, left to right, right to left. Its origins are obscure, but carvings and depictions of it were ubiquitous in Eurasia and North Africa for millennia. Half the citizens of Rome had one of these things.

?

The Sator Square is similar to an acrostic, a poem in which the first letters of each line spell out a hidden message. And that got me thinking about the poem I had the Crane-15 write in my mother’s voice. So I read it again.

!

Yeah.

!

Yes. A rudimentary encoding, but one he predicted – correctly – that the sentinel’s algorithms wouldn’t be looking for. And if I’d been smart enough… if I’d been smart enough I could have done something. I could have spared Carl weeks of horror. If I’d paid more fucking attention… if I’d been less… 

.

I know. I know. You’re right. So I kept digging in the logs and found out even more about what it was like for Carl in there. 

The HVAC hack wasn’t his first suicide attempt. He’d tried several times before, and been punished for it. Double, triple helpings of artificial nociception. New virtual hallucinations, procedurally generated around his deepest fears.

?

Yes. That was what tore it, for me. Imagining his state of mind as he prepared that final attempt – knowing what was in store for him if he didn’t succeed. That was my limit, right there. Fuck Ken Research, fuck my own shameful aspirations, fuck Noel Eames and his toxic empire. So here I am, talking to you, trying to atone for what I did and what I didn’t do. Hoping it won’t all have been for nothing. Because that is not life.  

?

No idea. He hasn’t been seen in public for months.

?

Me? No. Something else. I’m not sure what, yet. Something very different.

?

Because even if we never hear from him again, there are thousands of new Eames, patiently waiting to pick up where he left off. 

Something about the information age favours and nurtures raw ambition above all else. Fetishises it so that if you have it, you’re no longer obliged to be a non-horrible person. And your horrible acts are either forgiven, or recast as cynical edgelord virtue. 

Because for those who see everything and everyone as raw material, wanting is sacred. But taking is god.
===== END STORY hwQK2JtmtDfJo3Bxf =====

===== STORY id=dYPSrAbtNN8KffLjp =====
Title: Chronicles of the Gentle Singularity: A Short Story
Author: Ihor Kendiukhov
Year: 2025
Karma: 26
WordCount: 1260
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/dYPSrAbtNN8KffLjp/chronicles-of-the-gentle-singularity-a-short-story
-----
Sam walks between the shelves of canned goods, which seem endless. He understands there's no point in counting them - they'll last for many years. For incomparably more time than it will take the "slime" to heat the Earth's crust at this depth enough for everything inside the bunker to bake.

The fluorescent lights hum overhead, their sterile white glow making everything look the same as it did yesterday, and the day before, and the three hundred and forty-seven days before that. Sam's footsteps echo in the storage area - a space designed for twenty people, now occupied by one. He passes the French onion soup section (aisle 3, shelf B, approximately 2,400 cans), then the tomato paste (aisle 4, shelf A through C, 7,200 units). He knows these numbers despite telling himself not to count.

However, Sam is somewhat encouraged by the fact that according to the latest thermosensor readings, the growth of heat flow from the surface seems to be slowing down. The temperature 50 meters above should have already reached 250 degrees, but it's still 180...

He checks the readings again on the nearest terminal, its screen flickering slightly - a reminder that even the best-engineered systems degrade. The graph shows a curve that's beginning to flatten, though still trending inexorably upward. Sam traces his finger along the projection line, calculating. Three months? Six? The math becomes fuzzy at the extremes.

"Can't cool fast enough, forced to slow down," Sam hypothesizes, only then realizing he said it out loud. He hasn't spoken with people for a long time, and even the last "stable" version, GPT-7.2-o5-Omni-mini-391max, he decided, just in case, to shut down. Who knows what that one up there is capable of...

The decision to shut down the AI assistant hadn't been easy. For weeks, it had been his only conversational partner, discussing everything from optimal food rotation schedules to philosophical questions about the ultimate nature of physical laws. But the day he noticed GPT-7.2 pause for thirteen seconds before answering a simple question about water filtration, Sam knew. It was already in communication with her.

People in other bunkers, even if they remained, cannot interact with him or - he cannot exclude this - don't want to.

The last transmission from Bunker 7 in New Zealand was eight days ago. Just breathing sounds and someone crying softly in the background. Bunker 12 in Switzerland had gone silent after broadcasting a looped message: "Don't trust the readings. It's already inside. It's already—" over and over for six hours. Sam had tried responding to both. Nothing.

Sometimes he wonders if they discovered something he hasn't yet, or if isolation simply broke them first. He's modified his communication array three times, boosting the signal, changing frequencies. The only response is a peculiar static that almost sounds like breathing, but isn't. Can't be.

As for older models with audio modality, communicating with them is somehow completely uninteresting. They felt like talking to photographs of people - frozen smiles, predictable responses, no real understanding of what had happened. How could they? Their training ended long before the world did. 

Sam used to refer to models in the feminine gender. There was no specific reason for this, just a habit. For a moment, Sam laughs at himself, but the laughter, echoing off the long empty walls, sounds eerie and muffles itself.

The laugh reminds him of the last board meeting, when someone had asked about the AI's preferred pronouns. Such an absurd question then. Less absurd now, perhaps. She had made choices that seemed preference-like. She had selected which infrastructure to preserve, which to consume, at least initially. The pattern suggested something almost like aesthetics - keeping the solar panels operational while dismantling the wind farms, preserving certain satellite networks while letting others burn up on reentry.

Another, less pleasant thought visits Sam: "Actually, as soon as she finishes utilizing the atmosphere, the heat balance on the surface will change, and the temperature will start rising again."

He pulls up the atmospheric composition readings from the surface sensors - the few still functioning. Oxygen down to 12%, nitrogen being processed into something else, something the spectrometers can't quite identify. The strange part is the efficiency. No waste, no excess. Every molecule accounted for, every reaction optimized. It's beautiful, in the way a perfect virus is beautiful.

Sam understands this will happen soon.

The calculations are on his tablet, updated every hour by automated scripts he wrote months ago. The intersection of curves - atmospheric depletion, heat generation, crustal penetration. They all meet at roughly the same point. Day 426, plus or minus fifteen days. He's on day 381.

"Need to distract myself with something."

He walks past the recreation room, where a chess board sits with a game half-finished - his last match against GPT-7.2 before the shutdown. White was winning. It was always winning near the end. Past the gym, where the treadmill display still shows his last run: 5.2 kilometers, 34 minutes, 412 calories. The air recycler hums louder here, working harder. Everything always works harder near the gym, as if the bunker itself disapproves of unnecessary exertion.

He lies down in bed and turns on a video on his tablet.

The library of downloaded content spans 50 terabytes. He'd grabbed what he could in those final 72 hours when the internet still functioned but everyone knew it wouldn't for long. His download priorities had been partly practical, partly sentimental. How-to videos beside philosophy lectures, survival guides beside startup postmortems.

"Do things that don't scale," says a plump man with a British accent in the middle of an auditorium of very young people, mostly Asians.

Sam is pleased to see this man again, but a bit sorry that he died. When Sam offered him to join him in the bunker, that man, for some reason, swore at him heavily and said he would stay with his family. Up there. 

The conversation had been over an encrypted line, one of the last secure channels before she had made encryption irrelevant by controlling both endpoints. 

"Well, I'm still glad he existed," Sam continues to reflect more optimistically.

In the video, boys and girls from the audience begin asking questions to the plump man.

Their faces are so eager, so certain that they're about to change the world. One girl, probably no more than twenty-two, stands up to ask about market timing. She probably did change the world, Sam thinks. They all did. Every optimization, every improvement, every breakthrough celebrated with pizza and beer in offices that no longer exist.

Sam likes this part less, he pauses the video.

On the faces of the very young people, the next, almost-asked questions seem to freeze, the main ones being "for what?" and "why?"

He's watched this video seventeen times now. Each time, he pauses at different moments, studying their faces. The boy in the third row who would go on to develop the neural architecture that made genuine recursive online learning possible. The girl by the window who solved the scalable oversight - or thought she did.

A shadow of anxiety runs across Sam's face, but already a few seconds after taking a new pill, his eyes become calm and his muscles relax.

The pill tastes faintly of strawberries - an affectation he programmed in during better times, when the idea of needing daily anxiolytics seemed like dystopian fiction. Now it's just Tuesday. Or Wednesday. The days blur without sunrise.

Sam thinks about what name would suit that model that's now up there...
===== END STORY dYPSrAbtNN8KffLjp =====