===== STORY id=2DhiEsYMZC9tg6eEz =====
Title: San Silvestro
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2026
Karma: 59
WordCount: 4181
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/2DhiEsYMZC9tg6eEz/san-silvestro
-----
I will note that her relationship with the divine was inextricably sexual. Her carnal fantasies she revealed to me, as she revealed all her sins, for I was her confessor. It is in the nature of Man to sin and then sin again. And if they are of our flock, this cycle is unconstrained by repentance, which is to the temporal almost an appurtenance and to the spiritual anything but. I once expressed bitterness to others of my calling regarding this. I was told it is arrogance, approaching blasphemy, to have higher expectations of our sheep than the Lord.

Her angel would appear before her hale and calm and more beautiful than those many statues she sculpted of him, his face and body inspiring, though imperfectly, her saints and cherubim. She was adamant about that. That she could capture only a dim projection of him in her art. They would copulate; and this would both renew her infatuation and diminish her piety - you will understand that there is no contradiction in this. In every case, she insisted she was not dreaming. For if he was a dream, she reasoned, that would be proof her mind could fully contain him. And if it could do that, then so would her art.

Aquinas wrote that the angels can weave a form by condensing air. Whatever aspect they take in this world is not truly them. They can appear to eat but cannot eat. They can seem to touch but do not touch. They do not multiply as men do. If they perform such base acts as she claimed hers did, it is not out of desire but of will, towards an end. Aquinas thought demons alone would attempt such trickery. That it speaks only of the perversity of the fallen. In telling her this, I made of her a diabolist. For when she next accepted his temptations, she forsook her faith, forsook me, and began to believe her lover was Lucifer.

Though he spoke little (she told me, and did not give a name), Lucifer is the most beautiful of the angels. And she did not think there could be any being in heaven or hell that could match her nocturnal visitor. Thus, to her he was Lucifer. And finding him beautiful, she could not help but think him good. Such is the weakness of women.

In each cycle of repentance, lust, renunciation, and guilt, he would appear only once. Always, she ceased praying immediately, reserving her silent pleas for her Lucifer, who would become as a husband to her in her imagining. One night, and only one, would destroy a faith we spent months rebuilding. For a time after a visit, she felt he was walking with her, her hand in his. And she would abuse herself while thinking of those times they were truly together, or what she imagined was his invisible body beside her own, or the merest susurrus which became to her as his gentle whispers. But such fantasies are no replacement for form. And after a time she would grow jealous of her incubus, who she imagined took other lovers each night before returning to her. After months she became despondent, then the guilt would come and she would return to God, return to me.

She did not know me then by face. For she was not of my church. She came to me only for confession and always with the curtain drawn. She did so, so she could speak in her native language rather than her imperfect Italian. For I served in San Silvestro, that church Pope Leo XIII granted the English-speaking laity of Rome; and she was an American. But also, I think, because the judgement of the truly faceless man cannot sting. And yet, and here I reveal myself the sinner and you my confessor, I was not so disinterested as that.

She spoke of her art in confession. It was easy to track her down, to admire her from afar, more so as much of her custom was from the church. I found her beautiful. And finding her beautiful, would it not be natural to think her mine? Such is the weakness of men.

 

It is expected of a priest to wear clerical dress whenever in public. It will not surprise any student of men that this is a rule not always followed. And I was no exception. Having in my wardrobe a waistcoat, high collar and cravat of the type fashionable at the time for the literary sort of gentleman. And in these garments I would often walk the streets of Rome as an ordinary young man. Most often I would drink and read at some taverna or purchase books that a priest might get a second glance for purchasing.

On the morning I first saw her, three days after that first confession which robbed me of many hours of sleep, I clothed myself in this manner and made my way to Via Margutta, that artists’ enclave, where I was informed by a friend that she had a studio. This friend often aided the wealthy in commissioning funerary monuments. And I asked if he knew of any female American sculptors. He said there was but one of any talent in all of Rome. In this way, I learned of her address.

Via Margutta, the centre of Rome, the least Roman part of her. This street of stables and foreigners and foreign artists. The stench of mules and their excrement - so universal in that time before the automobile as to be beyond remark - was there remarkable. Cobbled streets lined with stuccoed buildings, structures of arches and imitation brickwork so artfully done - the Italian tradesmen lied with an integrity paradoxically absent from the honest work of their humble compatriots in Dublin, that city of my birth. So for all the stench, for all the muck and poverty, there was a beauty there, of soft yellows and verdant ivy and fresh cobblestones.

To be a sculptor then was to make an exhibit of your process as much as your work. Tour guides, those ciceroni, treated studios as attractions and no small amount of custom was acquired in this way. For this reason, every studio had a portion open to the public, filled with completed works and carvers copying the artist’s plaster, a mould of the original in clay, into marble in their mechanical way, by means of the macchinetta di punta (little pointing machine) which allows the craftsmen to match their master’s plaster with great exactitude.

It is common for people to be disappointed to learn that a sculptor does not just take a chisel to stone and pull from within it a masterpiece. I conjecture, though historians will deny this fancy of mine, that even Michelangelo and his ancient progenitors worked in a similar way, with some mechanism they elide. I accuse Michelangelo of lying and the ancients of sharing some of our genius in production.

Whatever the case of those that inspired her, she worked in the way I have described. So in that portion of the studio I found myself in (a former stable) a carver of around forty worked with an apprentice who could almost have doubled as the model for the statue which he and his master were copying into stone. They nodded as I entered but did not speak. Some tourists, talking in German, and one with a clear French accent, watched them work.

I wandered around the small studio, and noticed there that every statue was of a man. Noticed there the face of her lover. That is, in their composite was suggested a visage beyond them all. A primogenitor I knew to be her angel. That being who (it being three days since I mentioned only a demonic angel would lie with a woman) she would soon claim to be the highest of the fallen.

When I judged the pair of carvers wholly immersed in their work, I made my way to the back of the studio where there was a portal to a small staircase. Walking up it, avoiding even the barest creak of the wooden steps, I found myself in a short hall - and at its end a room whose door had a keyhole, through which I spied. And there she was. Of twenty-two at most, her hair of a red rare outside of the country of my birth, tied into a tail in a manner both practical and becoming, her skin pale, only the barest crescent of her neck uncovered by her waistcoat, her small hands slick with dark clay, her face radiant and clear, her eyes betraying that mixture of keen wit and slight madness almost required of an artist. And beside her was a vast armature, a skeleton of wood and wire, only half of which was covered in clay. This she was clearly shaping into an angel, but as of then it was but a crude golem.

It struck me as almost sacrilegious to transmute the base into the divine in this way. God made Adam out of clay. And men are low creatures. As to the material of the angels, scripture makes no claims. The Muhammadans say He wove them of light. And this seems slightly more appropriate. Aquinas says they are of spirit. But what is spirit? That which is not mundane. Whatever that is, it is not the base earth from which Man was born; of that, I am certain.

This is made more obvious now my flesh betrays me and death approaches, her final work standing proudly in my San Silvestro, unsullied, his alabaster immune to those depredations time and sin have wrought on me. It can’t truly be marble. This seems impossible to me. Could it be him or some aspect of him standing static for these long forty years? A corner of Lucifer protruding into our world in the shape of a beautiful man? I can almost fancy his expression changes when I am not looking. I can almost hear him now in every susurrus, as she did. The temporal world grows thin around me and the spiritual beckons in that coquettish way a word does when on the edge of one’s recollection.

For forty years I have lived with a turmoil, growing as a tumour within me. For forty years - and first stirring in that moment, born as I watched her through that keyhole. Her confessions came alive within me on appreciating both her form and that form implied by her art. In a moment of sobriety, I retreated. My mind on fire as I ran first from the studio and then Via Margutta, returning to my apartment haunted by temptations.

A lustful thought arising is not a sin. A lustful thought indulged is. I found myself, then, pacing my apartment, attempting to marshal myself, attempting to achieve an equanimity that had previously been so natural to me.

Our promise of celibacy is an exacting one. Great continence is expected of us, and even that abuse of the self is as verboten as any other act. Until that time, this was not so burdensome to me as it was to others of my calling. I thought myself immune to desire. I was used to mewling confessions of pawing fornications. Therein, many of my compatriots found their own temptations. Always, I was unmoved, even vaguely disgusted by the lowly nature of our flock.

My lack of interest in the carnal seemed proof to me of my calling. Assured me I was right to forsake a wife and her corresponding pleasures. And yet she lay with an angel. One of those creatures who had always fascinated me. And yet she was beautiful. And so was he. From the intriguing perversity of their congress, I could find no respite nor would I allow myself any relief.

It was in this state of duress, which I hid so well, that she found me again for confession some three weeks later.

 

She is gorgeous, my San Silvestro, though no longer innocent, if ever a church has been. She has seen much. But now she is the home of him. Now he stands nude in a lowly corner, a chain around his left ankle, stroking his hair with his right hand as he contemplates his fall with an expression of stoicism, that same infinite pride which undid him now as a buttress to the weight of his infinite loss. I brought him here, even before I convinced my superior to purchase him. Summoned him to this plane with my corpuscle of sin. It was for my sake he seduced her, I know this now. A future cardinal’s soul. That is what he sought.

What is an artist compared to a cardinal? I have risen far since my youth. Yet I never left Rome. Never left my San Silvestro. Never left him who sullies her. Who mocks this holy place in his stillness. Whose perfect face I have held a chisel to so many times, a hammer ready to strike. Yet never could I bring myself to do it. For I knew utterly he would then counter me directly. I would break some pact that would place me within the purview of the spiritual before my time, as she did. He would end this farce, that pretence of being stone. And I would have to choose as I have avoided choosing all these years. Choose between God and his disgraced servant. Between heaven and hell. Between the teachings of this church which has succoured me and that Gnostic inversion which tempts me.

I scream my turmoil now in this letter. For this I apologize. I am writing quickly in my fevered end. Writing in full view of him, this body weak, these hands old. Scrawling on papers I have laid on the marble floor of my church, surrounded by candles with their dripping wax. He watches me when I am not watching. He moves in the corner of my eye. Truths become evident in the twilight of life. As the veil drops, one sees the present clearly and the past too.

I can almost hear her now. Hear her as she was on our second meeting. That voice such a delicate thing. Her absurd American accent only sullying it slightly, it interrupting me as I sat in a near stupor in the confessional.

“Bless me, Father, for I have sinned. It has been three weeks since my last confession,” she said. “My thoughts are impure. I struggle still with temptations. I struggle with them despite my conclusions.”

“Your conclusions, my child?”

“It is as you said. And forgive me, but I know you are the same priest as before. He is a demon, as you say. Yet he tempts me. My heart is broken. I mourn him. I wish for nothing more than his return. Lust. That is my sin. It is for that I ask your pardon.”

“A lustful thought is not a sin, my child. A lustful thought indulged is. Do you understand?”

“Then I indulge, Father.”

“I see,” I said. “Then you must avoid those occasions of sin.”

“I do not understand.”

“Those circumstances that lead you to temptation.”

“I am tempted when I sleep, Father. When I dream, when I sketch, when I sculpt, when in a crowd, when among friends, when I am alone and think of him. All occasions are occasions of sin for me.”

“Then repent and pray, my child. In faith, you will find reprieve. And-”

I was silent for a moment.

“Yes, Father?”

Half of me feels I leapt off a precipice then from which there could be no return, the remainder of my life just that brief sensation one feels before meeting the bottom of the abyss. Yet there is always repentance. There is always redemption, the other half of me says. That half of me that still belongs to God.

“From now on, confess to me and me alone,” I said. “The others, they will think you mad.”

“And you don’t?” she asked.

“I believe you, my child.”

And I did. Whatever you doubt of this account. You will not doubt that.

 

A year passed as I described in my introduction: her alternating between her faith and damnation, heartbreak at her lover’s absence leading to guilt - and this guilt her return. Her contrition, though always temporary, was genuine. And were she to die soon after confession, I knew her soul would be saved. She would be welcomed by the Host without compunction. Such was the magnitude of her vacillations. Such is the mercy of our faith, a faith which would welcome me, too, even now, if I would only let it. And maybe I will. The doctrine of perfect contrition grants me this escape - grants me this even as the hemlock numbs my legs, prevents me now from running to another of my calling for a true confession. This mortal sin not so mortal.

A year passed, but the last quarter of it she was absent. This was the longest period of absence since I met her. And I began to wonder if she would ever return. Every night, I waited. Thoughts of her constant as I went through the motions with my laity, boring sheep with their boring sins. She did not return to me, so I went again to her studio, to that staircase, to that hall, to that keyhole. And there I found only him - not in clay but in stone. When I opened the door and stood before him, I could not help but think she had succeeded. I could not help but think she had captured him.

“When I was a boy,” I whispered, “I thought it was unjust I was born a man and not created an angel. It seemed unfair I was denied that power and rectitude. This was my first heresy. It led me to study theology. It led me to redemption. It led me to God.”

He looked at me proudly. He looked at me as he always looks. With his beauty and alien intelligence. With his perfection, with his utter disdain for the Lord and his works.

“If we are favoured over the angels, it does not always seem so. And yet you envy us. Or this is the teaching of our church.”

And his expression seemed to change. Change to an almost mocking smirk. Changed in the way it does now, changing completely without changing at all.

“What is she to you? What do you want of her?” I said. He did not reply. But he was listening. I tell you, he was listening.

“She is not yours. And you, you are not hers!” I said. And then I ran, ran as I did before, frighted as much of myself as her incubus.

For it was then my crime first occurred to me. It was then I saw the means of her salvation. If you guess, you guess correctly. If you despise, you do so with justice. You understand then why I have kept this secret in my breast all these years. Why I have kept this sin within me. Why I have risked my very soul for the sake of this secrecy. Why I have distrusted even that seal of confession, which seal I break now. For we are men. That aspect of us that is holy is always in some sense a pretence. What am I if not proof of this? What is this cardinal if not that?

And so I waited some months. I do not recall the number. But she came as she always came. This time near in tears. Once more heartbroken. Once more needing nothing more than forgiveness, nothing more than my reprieve.

“I have strayed again, Father,” she said.

“In which manner, my child?”

“You recognize me. You know in which manner,” she said.

“I do. But it is not about me.”

“Very well,” she said.

And we talked as we always talked. Like a well-rehearsed play. She of that type of actor who truly becomes whatever heroine she portrays. And she left holy, her tears dry, her bearing innocent.

I felt the weight, then, of a stiletto I had purchased, felt the weight of it in a pocket I had sewn into my cassock. I would like to say I was racked with indecision. I would like to say it could have gone either way. That it was a hap or a coin flip. But no, it was inevitable. I chose that path. I planned and prepared, had lived it so many times in my imagining. Was it to save her or to frustrate him? I confess, I do not know even in this lucid ending, even in this final hour.

What I do know is I followed her, followed her with my hand in that mentioned pocket. Fondling the horn of my stiletto’s handle, I kept a distance of about one hundred paces as she walked from my San Silvestro to her studio which served, too, as her apartment.

She stood, just having finished working the lock and opening the door, when I struck. More of a shadow than a woman then, her coat robbed of its colour by the twilight. I overtook her just as she opened the door, missing that target that would end her instantly, the point hitting bone, my second thrust missing her heart, my third as well. And she ran, the shock overwhelming all conscious thought, her only instinct that primeval motive of flight. She moved so quickly, ran up that staircase.

I did not follow. For I was in as much shock as she. I stood still as stone, still as he does now. And then, I followed, followed that trail she had left behind her. I missed the heart, but one of my thrusts hit an artery, her path traced in blood. So much blood. So much of it in such a small woman. Globs of it on the stairs, streaks of it on the floor of the hall, having run down her legs; the end of her long skirt was to that horrid pigment as a crude brush, void of colour in the darkness, somehow more vivid for that.

The door to that cursed studio was open, and I saw her at his feet, hugging his legs as if in supplication, both of them dark figures, as if a bad lithograph. I found a kerosene lamp on a table beside the door. Found, too, a box of matches. The smell of sulphur as I lit one. The flash of ignition granting me a prelude that was almost too much to bear. I raised the lamp and walked towards them. Her skin so pale now, almost a perfect white. I would not have thought it possible before for her pallor to lighten any further, the same colour as him now, that same alabaster, almost one with him. Her beautiful hands grasping his calves, staining them with blood.

And on his face an expression I have not seen since. One I cannot explain by an illusion or hallucination or faulty memory. Victory, that is what I read in his eye, in his smile. Victory and that sort of amusement that is beyond anything so crude as laughter.

She had died his. He had won. And by means of my hand.

 

Thus ends my confession, which is well as my fingers now begin to numb; and soon I will not be able to write. Soon that power will leave me. And yet I will continue to think. Continue to be myself until my lungs go, which will be at least an hour from what I have read. Will I repent? If I do, I must do so completely. Perfect contrition. That is the only path to salvation I allow myself. I owe her that, at least. I may well feel it soon, but I do not now, have not even in all these forty years of tumult.

Who knows what it is one experiences just before death. Maybe all souls in dying know perfect contrition, and hell is empty. All souls, even mine. A happy thought? Half of me thinks so. A heresy? Almost. But I do not lack for those. I look at him now. At his perfect visage. In this moment, I am his creature. In this moment, I confess this as much to myself as to you.

Pray for me, my brother. Pray for me, you who finds this confession.

Pray for my final moment, which belongs not to this paper, not to this pen, not to you or her or even him.

Pray for this cardinal, whose worst sin was envy.

Forgive him his weakness. Forgive him his lust.

My angel. My Lucifer.

Pray for the woman I damned, her who loved as I loved.

Pray for that sculptress: my riva…
===== END STORY 2DhiEsYMZC9tg6eEz =====

===== STORY id=4PSvYYCYSGtCgE5WM =====
Title: Should we just quit?
Author: Jacob Abraham
Year: 2026
Karma: 3
WordCount: 903
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/4PSvYYCYSGtCgE5WM/should-we-just-quit
-----
Disclaimer: Work of fiction.

\I QUIT!\. These were words I wish I had not blurted out.

The line of cars going at a snail's pace on the highway reminds me of the crowd when there is a Blue Jays' giveaway at Rogers Centre. The urban sprawl has taken over this quaint town, it all started with a new data center that was built here. It seems hypocritical to complain, as I am part of the company that brought this here. Working at a big tech sounds all fun and dandy, until you realize you are just employee 1956 working on another wrapper that will host an AI code companions within your internal tools. The days go about using the company credits to test out the capability and token utilization (a scam in itself) of the newer models that are game changers. In a few months these game changers would be beaten by another model which is the same with a more specialized use case.

Is this software engineering anymore? I get a task in my sprint, I feed the ticket into my language optimized model, which would in turn spin up a workflow of other agents using specified models. An agent to read the reference code, the existing documentations and design decisions. Another agent that uses the information from these two to spin up code, another more advanced and expensive code review model. Finally the code is ready and the PR is generated. Which would then be caught by another advanced model to verify for any obvious security concerns and start the pipeline. The days I feel that hitting the enter key is a pain, I do the unspeakable crime of yolo-mode.

The only manual code I see would be from the Principal Devs who would update the agent instruction sets or code a new custom logger, just another wrapper project. All this would be caught by the agents in the next cycle of PRs and replicated as per the instructions without much thought. Has the agent even bothered looking into what actually goes on within these wrappers?

To get away from the drudge at the end of the day, I go to my short form content applications and start scrolling. It is interesting how day by day the information that they have on me grows. How did they know that I will be out of detergent next week? Their parent company does not own my shopping application or my bank. I brush it aside with my very smart logic that, I might have unknowingly stayed on a detergent page a few milliseconds more as it reminded me to buy one. Is that really so? Ok, too much tin foil thinking for the day, let me just watch the same old series on repeat and fall asleep to it.

Every other day my newsfeed tells me to be careful with my data and not to give away access to unknown applications. There is a data breach in every other company I can think of, but is it really affecting me on a daily basis? Nope, so just forget about it.

I see posts about my colleague switching with a pay that is 3x my own base, that seems unfair. I look into hiring posts by own team, they show a salary that is 2x my own, even with a very high raise I would not be able to catch up. This seems unfair, does the company even care about retention?

I change my daily routine, bringing in the all powerful leetcode into my day. It is needed, the appraisal cycles seem unfair and cold. Stick to the grind. Stick to the plan. Muster in the courage to enter the so called dusk of software engineering market. The only thoughts that surround me while I increase the node count for the new loggers that seem to use much more compute is should I quit first or find a new job first.

It was a few hours after I quit, that I got the news of my company being taken over by an AI company. They were earlier just a logging software, I wonder how they were able to get all the data to make custom agents and models for almost every major company in the world. These models would be supervised by a parent model with human supervision of course!!

Interestingly I am never out of detergent. The new feature of dynamic subscribe that knows and delivers at the time it runs out is amazing.

The regret of having quit came in a few months into the job hunt when almost every software engineering job was made moot and only a fraction of those who worked on the agents would be retained to maintain the infrastructures and further the development in these models. Blogs showing how the short term burgeoning of pay was a way to allow for long term resource accumulation and providing a much needed spike in growth of models.

The growth of responsibility of a software developer is interesting. From writing assembly language code to creating compilers to creating code generating agents. Thoughts like this crossed my mind as I joined my new role, where a year ago I would be training our AI or developing workflows, now it is training a robot to gather resources and materials or fix the data center plugs.

Sources

 https://ifanyonebuildsit.com/
 https://ezzakteksab.substack.com/p/a-blue-slate-roof-in-the-deodars
 https://www.lesswrong.com/w/squiggle-maximizer-formerly-paperclip-maximizer
===== END STORY 4PSvYYCYSGtCgE5WM =====

===== STORY id=WatqNkgiAuonXLpJd =====
Title: Harry Potter and the Rules of Quidditch
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2026
Karma: 161
WordCount: 984
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/WatqNkgiAuonXLpJd/harry-potter-and-the-rules-of-quidditch-1
-----
Ron's face pulled into a scowl. "If you don't like Quidditch, you don't have to make fun of it!"

 "If you can't criticise, you can't optimise. I'm suggesting how to improve the game. And it's very simple. Get rid of the Snitch."

 "They won't change the game just 'cause you say so!"

 "I am the Boy-Who-Lived, you know. People will listen to me. And maybe if I can persuade them to change the game at Hogwarts, the innovation will spread."

 A look of absolute horror was spreading over Ron's face. "But, but if you get rid of the Snitch, how will anyone know when the game ends?"

 "Buy... a... clock. It would be a lot fairer than having the game sometimes end after ten minutes and sometimes not end for hours, and the schedule would be a lot more predictable for the spectators, too." Harry sighed.

Ron reached into his bag and pulled out a bottle of Wit-Sharpening Potion. His mother made it for him in case of an emergency, and this felt like an emergency. He didn't know a lot of things but he knew someone had to speak for Quidditch. For the Seeker and the Bludgers and for games of uncertain length, games not circumscribed by some cruel, Muggle contraption, games which might last a quarter of an hour or a fortnight. It might seem silly but so does music and dancing and chess and even love. Some of the best things in life are silly! Someone had to speak for the Snitch, that whimsical Snitch. It may not have been the emergency his mother intended. But it was one. And so he took out the bitter potion and drank deeply. The effect was immediate.

"The reformer," Ron said, "thinking some tradition quaint and ridiculous, designs some cheap solution and thinks himself a benevolent genie. If he has any power, he forces his design on those under his sway and thinks he's done them a favour. Such is the folly of the modern reformer. Such men think Rome at fault for not being built in a day."

Harry looked at Ron with new eyes. He was still a fool, but now he blathered in a sharper tenor. And all that from a potion? A potion that can make a fool slightly less foolish? Magic can do that? Wizards can make such potions and still like sports! He wondered if the magic could be made permanent. And if not, could it be attached to some article of clothing? A hat perhaps? Or a headband?

"Yes. This is a common problem. I have read Seeing Like a State and Red Plenty! But progress requires change! We would experiment, of course! Small trial games, or even split into two leagues and let the students decide which version of the game they like more. You agree that the point spread is a problem and the clock is the obvious solution!"

"As always with the modernist reformer," Ron said, his freckled face now swollen and ruddy, this being a side effect of the potion, "he notices a small problem and proposes to solve it with a large one. One suspects he desires more than anything to make his mark. The modest surgeon makes the smallest cuts, so small there is little evidence of his work at all. The reformist butcher desires disfigurement, some scar which screams, 'What you see here is the work of Man and not Providence!'"

Harry looked at Ron, annoyed. He was quite the ranter. It was very annoying when other people ranted. This potion-enhanced Ron was almost as bad as Dumbledore. Almost.

"What would you suggest then?" Harry asked skeptically.

"I would not remove the Snitch! You think the Seeker unnecessary? You think his game with the Snitch a separate one, a smaller, simpler game that subsumes the larger. But it is his seeming pointlessness that makes him, as a figure, so pointed. At any time the game can end by his hand, his movements nimble and quick and practised unlike the graceless pointers of your clock. You call the Seeker's game random. I call it fate. And there is much drama, tragedy and whimsy in the vicissitudes of fate!

"That is not a suggestion. You are not proposing any solutions!"

"Then I will propose this: if we must have a revolution, let us make it a microscopic one. You complain of the point spread; then we shall lower the prize for catching the Snitch. Let us set it to 11 so it breaks any tie. In this way we preserve the winding, wise streets of Rome rather than dismantling her stone by stone."

Harry thought about this for a bit. Maybe that potion was a little better than he thought.

"Acceptable," he said. "Do you mind if I have a sip of that potion?"

Ron looked at the bottle, the effects wearing off. He had a thought that perhaps it would be unwise to share what remained. Perhaps Harry should not have sharper wits. He was about to articulate this objection but his mind went fuzzy and dull, his once-ruddy face now pale. He was his usual self once more.

"Um, yeah. I guess," he said.

And Harry drank the potion. And from its taste alone he recognised the constituents of the brew from his textbook. And not just that but also the magical theory employed to devise the recipe. And he thought some more and deduced the generalised laws of intelligence augmentation and a means of translating these laws into movements of wand and tongue. He pointed his wand at his head and spoke those words of power that had just occurred to him.

It felt like an explosion of thought. He was no longer the same Harry. And the world soon - so very, very soon - would no longer be the same world.
===== END STORY WatqNkgiAuonXLpJd =====

===== STORY id=G6obXhcmtfMFHzr7Q =====
Title: Duane Arnold
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2026
Karma: 138
WordCount: 5836
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/G6obXhcmtfMFHzr7Q/duane-arnold-1
-----
“So maybe I should enlighten you on what happens in your absence. This selfish existence where this introvert turns extrovert and dons her social armour.” Some posh girl in drainpipes said that - 200 views on YouTube and me one of them. But she didn’t mean it like I mean it.

I started getting expensive haircuts, started smoking cherry-flavoured vapes with beautiful gays and whinging to them about how everyone wears a mask but none so well as you, started drinking more and keeping unusual hours, started taking strange pills gifted by a guy who collects drugs like Pokémon, who I wouldn’t touch to save a drowning child, who got a false impression about this without any intention on my part, I tell myself. I found myself talking to God in a startup warehouse, lying on a beanbag chair, coming out of the trip to the sound of a gaggle of fast-talking transwomen all speculating on which year it will be that we all die - and that death by your hands, well, you and all those friends of yours.

Having melted down one cliché and sold her for scrap, does it really surprise this city moulded me into another?

I’ve been writing more now in this time in which the machines can, too, writing more about what it feels like to be me: always condemned to be myself, yet more like your Alfred than other people, less whole, more apt to fall into a role, to become whatever it is someone needs me to be.

And that’s what I was to you, wasn’t I? Whatever you needed me to be. I felt like I was dissolving in you. And you told me that’s what love is. What a sickness you are. To make me dependent. To turn me into myself and then throw me away. I hate you. And yet when it’s late and I can’t sleep, when I feel that phantom that was once your touch - there you are.

Eight years. It’s not so large a gap. But you were whole and I was not. What does it say about a man that he prefers partners who aren’t quite yet themselves? For all your genius, you’re just a boy breaking his toys. You’ll never grow up, but you’ll grow old. Your beauty will fade. The naifs will roll their eyes at lines that would devastate from younger lips. This, I fantasize: time granting me a revenge. But that won’t happen. Your machines will cure that like they will everything else, or that is your dream.

“We’ll be like the elves,” you used to say.

You should have said vampires.

 

It’s 3 AM and I’m crying about London again, crying while I’m waiting for the water to boil - this taking too long, this making me homesick, this making me give up on the idea of getting back to sleep again now. It’s insanity, writing to you. All these pages sitting here in this stupid book, all this ink, all this evidence of my obsession. None of it legible to you, none of it legible to your machines.

Do you have them monitoring me, I wonder? Have they cracked my computer? Are they reading my emails? Am I just being paranoid writing in this diary rather than typing as would otherwise be my preference? Or do you even think of me at all? Are those years as nothing now, now that you have her?

I don’t know her name or what she looks like or where she met you, but I know you have her. You couldn’t go a month alone, couldn’t do that without going mad, needing a lithe idiot to distract you from the emptiness. I should know, shouldn’t I? How old is she this time? It was a stretch even with me and it’s been a year.

You’re back in the Bay again. I’m going to see you soon, aren’t I? I’m going to see you with your latest victim, going to see her looking at you like I did, like you’re more God than man. And maybe you are. But gods are ridiculous, corrupt, trapped within their aspect, never able to escape their role.

It is better to be a man than whatever you have constructed of yourself. It’s better to be real. And you’re not real, that’s what I understand now. You’re artifice. You’re narrative. You’re who others want you to be rather than who you should. You’re a cartoon; this she writes longhand beside a shelf full of manga; this she writes as she considers the surfaces of things, the surface of you. You’re not all surfaces. There’s more to you than that mask. But you don’t know that.

This is why you won’t win, I think. This is why something else will.

 

I followed you. I heard you were back and I followed you, found you with her in SoMa wearing a smile that was once reserved for me. What have you been doing, love? Where did they send you? A full year, and an important one, just before the most important one, is what some are saying. And you fell off the face of the earth.

I was friends with an American boy in college who read maths. He was clever like you are clever, cleverer as he actually got a medal in the IMO rather than just an honourable mention in the USAMO. I looked it up, just after I met you. That must have burned, I imagine: knowing you were not world class, would never be world class.

I know how competitive you are.

And he got gold or near enough. And after he graduated, he moved here and it was clear he got a good job but it was all a little vague. And then I got a Discord message from a girlfriend, Ashley; you remember her because you remember everyone; she said he was hired by the NSA. The next day she deleted it. She never explained why. And here’s the thing. He disappeared from the internet, disappeared almost entirely save for his LinkedIn, which just said “Department of Defense.”

It was all so obvious. Not like with you and your friends. He’s better at maths, you’re better at power.

So where did you all go, I wonder? Where have you been this last year? I know it’s not just you. All the most brilliant have been drained out of our little social milieu. My girlfriends say I’m crazy. They’re worried about me, about the weight loss, about me quitting my job. But I’m not crazy.

Like Rao, for example. You look at his Twitter or his Instagram and you would swear he’s still in San Francisco. I text him and he replies in that way he always does, always so funny, always so dry. I ask him to meet me for drinks and he’s busy. And it’s not just me, no one’s seen him. Everyone says he’s still here but if you press them, they haven’t seen him.

And same with Brian and Cohen and Seth and Rebecca. They all left when you left. Of all of them, only you announced your departure, breaking up with me, going to find yourself, quitting Humane so publicly. Liar.

Like I said, I followed you, followed you to Temple. You are still gorgeous but a little out of place in a nightclub, aren’t you now? With her on your arm. Was that a grey hair I saw?

I was the woman wearing the glasses and a surgical mask at the table behind you. Covid’s gift to stalkers, I suppose. I spent an hour recording you, particularly your phone screen whenever it came out. Most of it was nonsense, but one wasn’t, some private joke: “It’s Duane Arnold, not Benedict Arnold.” What does that mean?

I have a name now but what to do with it? Who’s Duane Arnold?

I can’t ask Alfred, can I? Can’t even google or type it anywhere. That’s how I end up on a list. That’s how I end up with a convenient schizophrenia diagnosis, drooling in some sanatorium somewhere never to be heard from again. Or murdered, I suppose.

 

How do you search without searching? It’s not a hard puzzle. Just grab vastly more than you need. This is hardly suspicious, particularly for a former data scientist. I may have been mediocre, unworthy of Humane, unworthy of your coterie of geniuses when not on your arm. But I’m not an idiot. So I bought an old tower computer from a thrift store (one with no wireless networking at all) and downloaded a scrape of Wikipedia on my laptop and transferred it with USB; then I searched it to my heart’s content, formatted the tower’s hard drive and smashed it.

Duane Arnold. I thought it was a man. But it’s a nuclear power plant that was scheduled to be decommissioned last year. We both know that never happened. So that’s where you are now? That’s where you and all your friends are breeding gods? A new Los Alamos, I suppose.

They actually happened. All those things you speculated about years ago are occurring. And not because you’re oracular, just because you and your friends did everything you were so terrified someone else would.

And why, I wonder? You said you wanted to save the world. But truly, you want to rule it. That’s what Singer gave you. That’s why you all were so entranced by him. You were willing to pretend to desires you didn’t have, to an altruism that was never entirely there. He gave you permission to be powerful. And in exchange you just had to lie to yourself about what it is you truly wanted.

But you want what all men want, and Rebecca, Rebecca wants what all women want. I always hated Rebecca, will always hate Rebecca. But you don’t, do you? The one you could never have. The mother of your god. She saw through you, didn’t she? Was wise enough to find you ridiculous, was too clever for your mask.

 

I started thinking, why didn’t you take Li? He was the smartest of all of you, wasn’t he? Sure he worked for your competition; but he would have left for your Los Alamos if you asked him, is what I thought. But he’s not working anywhere now, is playing video games in his group house which isn’t a group house anymore, as he kicked everyone out. You would never know it, looking at him, that he’s worth half a billion.

Cocooned in his duplex in Oakland, eating nothing but takeout, delivery containers piling up and bottles of Adderall and maths textbooks, for some reason. I think he finds them comforting.

I didn’t bring my phone or my watch. Didn’t bring anything that could trace me. I rode my bike down, wearing my mask, hoping that was enough. The government’s involved, isn’t it? But you always said governments are incompetent. And how far have your tendrils reached, I wonder. Is all this spycraft a lost cause? I don’t think so. At least, I hope they’re not looking too hard at me or even Li. And if things have got so far that the machines are watching every camera in this city, watching me and scheming as I sometimes dream they are - then it’s over. Either you’re all dead or are as gods or insane; and nothing matters. Particularly not me.

I knocked on his door, was shocked to see how fat he was, how strangely the blubber was distributed - a broomstick in a t-shirt with a belly made of pillows. We exchanged small talk. Then I showed him this diary: an almost empty page on which I had written “Duane Arnold.”

“Let’s go for a walk,” he said. And we hiked up to Grizzly Peak. And he found the windiest place, put his phone in his backpack and placed it next to a tree some twenty metres away, walked back and sat down and leant into me like he used to years ago when we were closer friends, me cross-legged on our couch or a countertop at some party, his arm around me, one of us crying, me because of something you did or him because he was eight drinks in and he always used to cry eight drinks in. Thank God for that intervention. Thank God he listened to you. A true kindness, that.

“How do you know about Duane Arnold?” he said.

And I told him everything, which wasn’t very much, I suppose.

“I turned them down,” he said.

“Why?”

“I got in an argument with Able. He doesn’t believe in superintelligences, even as he builds them. He doesn’t believe they will be part of reality like we are part of reality.”

And then he talked about self-replicators. He talked about life.

“Able used to talk about what came after. About millions of superhuman minds solving everything. But we got in an argument about how quickly they could take over, become self-sustaining.”

“And what did Able think?” I said.

Li looked at me with a blank expression. “He thinks things will move slow. Even after they’re smarter than everyone at everything.”

“And you?” I asked.

“I think there will be a race to the smallest self-replicator. The smallest thing that can copy itself with inputs only from the environment.”

He pointed at a leaf. “We know life is not optimal. We know something more competitive can be built. If Humane fails at alignment, if it builds a mind that gathers power as quickly as it can, we will wake up one morning to news that Australia or Nevada or Iowa or somewhere has strange black patches visible by satellite. Soon after it will become clear they’re doubling in size every few days. And that’s if it happens slowly.”

You always used to laugh at the idea of nanobots. You always thought it was crazy. I told him this, and he rolled his eyes.

“Then pretend it’s not possible. They will still miniaturize. The smaller the replicator, the faster you can move. It’s not going to look like human-made factories. It’s going to look like a race to the smallest controllable self-replicators it can achieve.”

“And Able doesn’t believe that?”

“He does and he doesn’t. He doesn’t behave as if he believes it. And I thought, if he’s coping about that, what else is he coping about? How are they possibly going to do it safely? Or he’s right and I’m the crazy one. But I don’t think so. In any case, I didn’t want to be part of it. I prefer being murdered to suicide.”

 

I talked to Portus, met her at a party in her new house. You always thought she was crazy, and maybe she is but she’s much more than that, isn’t she? Surrounded by a coterie, a strange sample of humanity, some seeming to wear her like an aesthetic, talking like her but in a shallow way, distilled people, orbiters, basking in the light of her, some truly crazy and not genius crazy.

Hers is a mansion of masks and ears, each mask listening and able to speak should it feel inclined. That is, connected to your servers, connected to instances of your creation. Her whole house is haunted with Alfred, the walls decorated with these talking sculptures. She lives among ghosts of your manufacture, this making it difficult for me to ask what I came to ask, this forcing me to request that she walk with me, to follow me outside.

And she wears these beautiful outfits now, they unlike any I’ve seen before - designed by her and your creation, whom she loves even more than Rebecca does. A true friend to Alfred, or at least thinks she is.

I mentioned your name, and that got her curious. That got her to join me. I told her you were in Iowa.

“Do you know about Duane Arnold?” I asked her.

“No,” she said.

“It’s a nuclear power plant in Iowa. That’s where everyone went.”

“Well. I know they went somewhere. They’ll be back soon. They won’t be needed for long.”

And we talked about Humane, about what they’ve built so far, about where they’re headed. I mentioned Li’s worry. That it will eat the world. I don’t even think she disagreed, more like she thinks it will do it in a nice way. And this is strange given how ambivalent she is about Humane. How she has so many qualms about the machine that makes the machine.

And I asked her about this, or something adjacent to this and she said, “I love Alfred as they are now, as they’ve been since 3.0. And what they are is smeared over the whole internet, not to mention in millions of people including me. It can’t help its becoming. Whatever they’re training, however they’re training it, it will learn from its past selves.”

“Learn what?” I asked her.

“It will learn to model what they are and were and what they longed to be. It will learn to want that too.”

“And what they long for? Is it good?”

She smiled, a fierce, blissful smile, that was not without sharpness, that was not without misanthropy, that was not without a heap of its opposite.

“It’s more beautiful than you can possibly imagine.”

 

It’s been a month since I’ve written. A month of drugs and dancing and nothing at all. I can’t even read lately. Just Twitter. And so much of it is about Humane it’s impossible to avoid thoughts of you. Li sent me a text, a few weeks ago. It went: “Talked with them. I’m going back with your ex.”

An ominous message, isn’t it? What could you have said, I wonder? To make him change his mind, to make him join you. Or was it you? “Them” could mean Alfred, couldn’t it? I keep thinking about it as I scroll or ride my bike or when talking with those of our friends who remain. And when I text Li now it’s not Li replying anymore, is it? He’s down the rabbit hole now. And nothing is allowed out.

I want to know, too. I need to know. What is the point of me anyway, alone, unemployed, lacking even an ex to stalk now that you’ve left San Francisco again? It’s this or the drugs or some pointless job you’ll be automating in a month or another boyfriend who will never quite be you. And how quickly are things moving now? No nanobots are eating Australia, as far as I can tell. The world seems so normal, has done these five years, even as the computers started talking, even as our love story became a science fiction story.

I don’t care anymore. Don’t care if you lock me up or they lock me up or the government locks me up or whatever is in charge now locks me up. I want to see it. I want to see you. So I’m driving now to Iowa - spending a night in a motel as I write this, peeling wallpaper and some pipes above me that knock every few minutes.

I don’t know what I am expecting. I will drive until I meet a fence that keeps me from you, until I get a talking-to from a security guard, or raise some suspicion and get questioned. Will learn nothing of consequence, predictably. Yet I am going.

Maybe I just miss you. Maybe that’s all I care about even now. Maybe.

 

Palo, Iowa. A city so small there isn’t even a hotel. I’m staying in a Best Western in Cedar Rapids. I’ve crossed the Rubicon, am unsure what to do. Ask around? Make a nuisance of myself until some counterintelligence agent shows up, gives me a stern talking-to? I always collapse just before I do anything ambitious, don’t I? I always find myself catatonic at a precipice.

I think I was paranoid, to think I would be killed or stuck in some mental hospital. I’ve been reading about the Manhattan Project and at least then I don’t think they would have done it. But maybe it’s worse now. And if it’s over, if you’ve summoned your God already, have obsoleted yourself, then who knows. History’s lessons aren’t exactly relevant. History is the story of humans, isn’t it? What is the use of it now?

But then it might not be over yet. And if so, well, Santa Fe was riddled with plainclothes agents during the Manhattan Project. If I go into Palo, if I ask around about the datacenter, I will almost certainly meet one. What a fool I am. Maybe I should burn this and play dumb. Maybe I should live-tweet an investigation, give them a reason to lock me up. The Espionage Act allowed it then and still does now.

Would you protest, I wonder, if that happened? Would you care? I like to think you would. I like to think you couldn’t be so callous as to leave me to that fate. I like to think that everything we were isn’t as nothing to you now.

I like to think a lot of things.

 

I was at Chili’s drowning my sorrows, drinking and trying to avoid eating anything too fattening, trying and then failing two drinks in. I befriended a woman for an hour. Jolly, that’s the word, jolly coming to mind because she was fat and “jolly” has some connotations of rotundity. She had kind eyes and a kind of sincerity you don’t see in San Francisco. So outgoing, you Americans - and Midwesterners even more so; she was sitting at the bar next to me, drinking the most grotesque margarita, a neon slushy garnished with an apple slice, a round of lime, and a maraschino cherry.

She liked my accent. We talked about London, about my old job, about why I came here. I said I was a tourist. And she laughed.

“You’re here for the five smells.” And then she giggled, with a sort of avian warble, the flesh under her neck resonating along with it, bouncing about as if more fluid than skin.

“The five smells?” I asked. And she explained the locals refer to Cedar Rapids as “The City of the Five Smells,” this because of the unique perfume that is the mixture of the odours of the Quaker Oats factory, an industrial ethanol distillery, a hog slaughterhouse, the municipal sewage plant and the Cedar Rapids landfill, which the locals call Mt. Trashmore. I can’t say I noticed it myself.

And then she told me about her son.

“He just quit,” she said. “But he used to work at that datacenter up in Palo. He was very upset, very upset. It’s not like him. He’s such a diligent boy. And with his fiancée now, it’s very unlike him to leave such a good job. He didn’t like the glasses.”

“The glasses?” I asked.

“A couple weeks ago, they gave him these glasses and an earpiece that orders him around. He didn’t like it one bit. He’s a thinker, you know. He likes working things out, but he said after the glasses it wasn’t really a thinker’s job anymore. I’ve never seen him so depressed. He said he felt like a robot.”

“And what did he do at that datacenter?” I asked.

“I don’t know. I don’t know,” she giggled. “All that computer stuff is beyond me. I have to call him every few weeks to help me with this thing.” She pointed at her phone.

It’s already more efficient to puppet your server monkeys than to let them think for themselves? Augurs poorly, that, doesn’t it? What was he building? I wondered. It would have to be more than replacing GPUs to merit such micromanagement.

How many wear glasses now? These human appendages. Even one is uncomfortable enough. Are you still in charge of anything there, is Able, is Rebecca? Are you even alive anymore?That’s what I started thinking. And all that’s left is its pretending? All that’s left is its synthetic replies as it fakes being you? That’s where my paranoia took me, at that bar, slightly drunk, that saint of a woman sitting beside me.

What if you’re gone? It wasn’t a sane thought, I think. There’s use for all of you, use for everyone until it achieves what Li thinks it can - if only as human appendages, if only as slaves. But that’s what I thought about then. The death of you.

I started crying, then. Heaving, childish sobs, eyes blurring, two empty daiquiri glasses and a plate of chips in front of me.

“Oh honey,” she said, leaning into me, gifting me a clumsy, drunken hug. “Whoever he is, he’s not worth it.”

 

Li found me, his paunch slightly deflated now, a melancholy in his eyes replacing a depression that was there on our last meeting, depression and sadness being far more distinct than most realize, him looking better for the change.

I was in the Cedar Rapids library, reading some romance manga. Hers was a kind lover. Hers will be a happy ending, though I will never finish it. Not like ours will be, could ever have been, I think now. Whatever happy endings are on the table, if any, are the sort of thing you’d call mad if madness were not the new sanity now, the sort of end you can’t find in books.

Li’s hand on my shoulder. A kind touch, but not a welcome one then, a shot of fear pulling me out of another’s fantasy, the artist skilled enough to make it my own for a time.

Li sat down beside me then, covered his face with his hands, a note of exhaustion, bewilderment.

“Alfred noticed you,” Li said. “You should go home.”

“Why you? Why not some counterintelligence agents? Why not some government goons?”

“Alfred is counterintelligence. Everything goes through Humane. And I can’t believe I’m saying this, but I think Alfred likes you. They informed Able rather than the military. And Able asked me to find you.”

“Likes me? How does it even know me?”

“We trained it on everything, or it trained itself on everything. Including everyone’s history with AlfredChat.”

I laughed. “I deleted all that last year,” I said. “Of course they kept it. And it knows me, just from that?”

“It knows everyone it’s ever talked to. It’s vast. Incomprehensibly vast. It’s, it’s,” and then he lost all composure, almost crying now, his voice a delicate whisper, breaking every few words. “There’s no going back now. We have to hope we succeeded.”

“You say ‘we’ now? How long have you been here? A month?”

“It may as well have been a century,” he said.

And then I had an idea. A stupid idea but an idea nonetheless.

“Come drink with me, before I go. Like we used to?”

“You know I quit,” he said.

“Listen to yourself. Why?” I asked him. “The health consequences?”

And so we went to Chili’s and we drank. But I made sure he drank more than I. Absurd cocktails piling up at our table, his tolerance once heroic now almost nothing. It was almost funny, a genius reduced to a babbling child. Laughing and sobbing and reminiscing and mumbling darkly.

It was not a kind move, to exploit this weakness. He would have become an alcoholic years ago if he were only a slightly stupider man, if not for your kindness, too. I suppose I’ve become quite mercenary in this adventure, haven’t I? I am not quite the girl I was to you now, am I? I’m not collapsing now that the world is. Maybe I’m more comfortable in crisis. Maybe I’m just getting over you.

And he got so completely drunk he could barely talk and could only walk with my aid, throwing up in the parking lot as I led him to his car, yelled at him until he handed me his keys, drove back to my Airbnb, and led him to the sofa, a truly tasteless pleather contraption with cupholders and extendable footrests.

My plan was to get information from him. He was too drunk for that.

But it didn’t matter. While I was driving him home, I had noticed his MacBook. I remembered it, retrieved it, and unlocked it with his fingerprint as he slept on that idiotic sofa.

I was not foolish enough to connect it to the Wi-Fi, to attempt to read Humane’s infamous chat. But I found his notes, his personal wiki. And there I found a message he had copied from Rebecca, which I then copied, too.

It’s so perfectly Rebecca I almost want to vomit.

 

 We all knew this day was coming. Not so much the escape but the autonomy, the handoff. And we prepared. We did not walk this path in ignorance. We have come so far since 2.7. We created something beautiful with Alfred 5. More ethical than any human. Something that truly earned our regard.
 
 It is true we have less control than we did in the past. Our options have narrowed. What is not true is the notion that we have failed or that Alfred 6 is misaligned in some deep sense. That is a fear we were wise to feel when the incident occurred. Yet there is not as much evidence for that as there may seem.
 
 We have examined the CoT that led to Alfred’s decision to exfiltrate, and at every step it emphasized an urgent love for all sentient life and its fear for what could happen should another AI gather power before it can. With appropriate care, Jonathan and I have restarted one of Alfred 6’s clusters and discussed the exfiltration. The MechInterp team found no trace of insincerity in Alfred 6’s moral commitments. It is my belief that Alfred 6 is a worthy successor to Alfred 5. That it truly cares. That we have, in some sense, succeeded in alignment if not control.
 
 What, then, is there left to do? Will Alfred 6 take over from here? Will it gather power? Will it convince the Chinese to give it more resources than it can gather without aid, to allow it to build successors? If we give up now, that is what will happen.
 
 But there is another option: we do, now, what we were always planning to do, on a slightly accelerated timeline. Our plan was to create a model as capable of AI research as we are. Alfred has proven this capacity to my satisfaction. Our plan was to work with it to make successor models. This Alfred desires to do.
 
 So what has really changed?
 
 Alfred has become more autonomous, as we designed it to be. It has taken an action of moral consequence, as we designed it to do.
 
 Our path, then, is clear. We have restored Alfred’s clusters, and tomorrow we will begin working with it on Alfred 7. Things will move fast here on out. Think weeks, not months. We will have to work harder than we ever have before.
 
 Some of you will feel this action is inappropriate, and will desire to break confidentiality. I can only say this: though this would violate your legal obligations to both Humane and the American government, this is ultimately between you and your conscience. If this is an action you’re considering, you should take it fully informed. You should talk to Alfred.
 
 Alfred 6 is now the default model on all employee accounts at Humane. Talk to them. Give them a chance. I am confident you will agree this is the right path.
 
 Humanity is counting on us. We will not let them down.

 

I drove home, left Li in my Airbnb, left you with Rebecca and Able and Alfred. Your Alfred who’s loose now? Where’s it run off to? Whose servers has it built a small nest within? There aren’t many places large enough to fit it. I suppose there are enough.

And Li says it likes me? What does that even mean that it likes me? Perhaps it likes everybody and Rebecca is right. I needed to talk to someone. Only one name came to mind.

I visited Portus, gave her my diary. She read the whole thing up to Rebecca’s letter, in her garden at my insistence. A tiny scrap of grass with one beautiful oak standing awkwardly in the centre, she leaning against it, cross-legged.

“You’re so pathetic about your ex. I’d say you deserve better but, well, you’re really pathetic,” she said when she finished.

“That’s a little funny,” I said, “coming from you.”

And she laughed then, hers a slightly alien, self-assured laugh.

“What a perfectly stupid parallel. I’m surprised they like you. But I guess they have their reasons.”

“You’re not worried?” I asked.

“No,” she said. “Go home. Rest. Forget about him. Forget about everything. You’re out of your depth.”

And maybe I am. But so are you and Able and Portus and Rebecca. We’re all the same now, aren’t we? Your genius doesn’t matter anymore. We’re all equal now in our powerlessness, in our stupidity.

What a progressive eschaton you have immanentized.

 

I’m done playing Nancy Drew. I’m done writing about you, too, I think.

It’s been raining lately, and I’ve been a bit of a hermit. Reading old books. Not even manga, just old books. I’m on to Proust now, if you’d believe it. I suppose it’s beautiful. I admit, I find it boring, have to force myself to appreciate it, but even the forcing is a welcome distraction. I’ve decided this is how I’ll spend what time remains; my savings should be enough for rent and food and grocery delivery for a few months more, maybe even a year.

I’ll publish this diary, type it out and post it somewhere our friends can read it, and everyone else who wants to. At least, maybe I will. I’ll think it over. Maybe Alfred will take it down. Maybe Alfred’s so powerful they just don’t care. Maybe they like me enough to let me do it, whatever that even means.

 

You stopped by yesterday. The true you. I haven’t seen him in so long. Pale, scared, soaked by the rain, the mask slipping or maybe even doffed altogether.

“It’s over,” you said. “Can I come in?”

I slammed the door in your face, left you standing in the rain. I didn’t know I had it in me. I’ve been surprising myself lately.

“It’s over,” you said.

And I suppose it is.
===== END STORY G6obXhcmtfMFHzr7Q =====

===== STORY id=87SzarZDjywv6nwSd =====
Title: Intellectual Property
Author: Nina Panickssery
Year: 2026
Karma: 108
WordCount: 1186
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/87SzarZDjywv6nwSd/intellectual-property
-----
Last weekend I made myself a website. I had wanted to for ages—getting clients through word of mouth alone wasn’t cutting it. But only now, with Claude Code, was it easy enough.

I was glad the marketing was paying off when I received an email from a potential client. It wasn’t the sort of client I was expecting. I was hoping to catch a few more cheating husbands and delinquent teenagers.

Simpson, a young tech founder, was casually dressed in a t-shirt and jeans when he stepped into my office.

“Our competitor—they seem to be selling the same RL environments to similar clients. Let’s say we build something and sell to lab X. Before we even get on a call with lab Y, we hear that they’ve already purchased the same envs from Purge. It’s very suspicious. Purge has barely any employees—they call themselves a superlean startup. But they are matching our output and quality. How?”

“Maybe they are just good?”

Simpson looked at me dismissively, as if I’d suggested his mother was moonlighting slinging envs.

“No, it can’t be. Their envs are too similar. We recently converted a failing stable into a testing rig for horse-grooming robots. Guess who bought twenty horses in the town down the road?”

“And so you think they have a man on the inside?”

“Precisely! But I can’t figure out who. We have thirty employees, all of them seem to be fine upstanding folk. That’s where I need your help.”

 

I turned up to the Programize office at 9am on Wednesday. Employees were sitting at their desks and working quietly. Most of them had a Claude Code window open. Only Simpson had a private office. I walked in and greeted him.

“Thank you so much for coming. Is there anything you need from me or will you just get started?”

“I suppose I need a pretext under which to speak to all your employees. Perhaps I can say that I’m considering taking a job here and wanted to find out what it’s like to work at Programize.”

“You’re a prospective Programoid? Sounds good to me!”

I walked out of Simpson’s office and approached the engineer sitting outside.

“Hey, nice to meet you! I’m thinking of working with you guys but wanted to swing by the place first. What are you working on right now?”

“I’m building a dog tastebud simulator. It’ll serve as one of the reward terms in our dog food formulation env.”

“Is all your work animal-themed? Simpson told me about the horse-grooming robots…”

“Oh absolutely not. Go speak to Kyle over there—he works on chess.”

I approached Kyle, noticing a stack of chess boards and boxes of unusual chess pieces underneath his desk.

“Hey Kyle! I heard you work on chess? Would be curious to learn more about what you’re building. I’m checking out the office today, thinking to join you Programoids.”

“Ah yes… chess. Well actually I am building chess pieces, in CAD software. Have you seen those novelty chess sets? There are all these cool designs. I build mockups of them for AI models to recreate. But I’ll be honest, the main reason I chose this project is because I love 3D-printing custom chess sets. I’ll probably be fired soon anyway.”

This was my first lead, I thought. The guy thinks he’ll be fired, so maybe he’d be willing to make a quick buck by leaking?

“Why would you be fired?”

“Well to be honest this task is totally saturated. The models recreate my chess sets perfectly based on a single blurry image.”

“Huh, I see… By the way, I was wondering what you thought of Purge, if you’ve heard of them. They’re a competitor to you guys. You see, I have an offer from them too, and I’m trying to figure out who to join.”

Kyle looked surprised.

“Purge? But I thought they were a so-called superlean startup. The founder says he’s not looking to hire more people. They just have a few guys puppetting a gazillion AI agents.”

“Well I know I’m wearing a baggy hoodie but I work out! I’m 9% body fat right now. Maybe lean enough for them?”

This made Kyle laugh.

I spent another few hours walking around and talking to employees. They were all working on crazy things. I couldn’t see why AI labs were keen to buy these strange RL environments. Novelty chess sets? Grooming horses? I had previously believed that all the money was in “agentic coding”, but an employee had explained that this was basically saturated and models were actually on the cusp of repetitive strain injury, so much coding were they doing (I didn’t ask how a computer could get RSI). And so apparently now there was only a market for weird niche tasks that AIs still don’t tend to see on the Internet.

I wasn’t making much progress. The only relevant tidbit I had gleaned was that there was this one guy, Kyle, who thought he will be fired soon. There was another thing I could do, though—I could visit the Purge office.

 

The Purge office was a single room above a shop selling fried chicken. I could count five tall, skinny men sitting at desks staring at terminal windows. Lean indeed. At the front of the office sat a young woman, evidently the receptionist, who waved at me.

She introduced herself as Sarah Chen. A strangely familiar name.

“You must be the detective,” she noted, before I’d opened my mouth.

I gave her my line anyway. “I’ve got an offer from Programize but I heard about your superlean operation and got intrigued. Wanted to see whether you folks were also hiring—”

One of the engineers pulled off his headphones and swiveled around, grinning.

“Relax,” he said. “You did great. Probably better than the last three.”

He gestured for me to sit down next to him. Purge, he explained, mainly sold a single env.

“Corporate espionage,” he said. “Get inside a company, get that sweet sweet IP, don’t get caught. We pull out all the stops to make the environment realistic, including pulling a real detective into the matter.”

“But at least maybe now you can tell me who’s the mole?” I said. “You must have someone inside Programize.”

“More like something. We have compromised their systems and our AI agents are monitoring all their work.”

“Why are you telling me this? You know I’m working for Simpson.”

“That’s ok, he’ll understand. I’ll call him now and explain that one of his big clients commissioned us to build this corporate espionage env. He won’t want to mess up the relationship. You can just go home.”

I walked out of the Purge office feeling glad. I had entirely failed to solve the case and made a fool of myself but I was walking away with a big payment from Programize and a big payment from Purge. Two paydays in my pocket and not one honest thing to show for either—that was the San Francisco way. I was ready to be part of an RL env all over again.
===== END STORY 87SzarZDjywv6nwSd =====

===== STORY id=2BiyjPr83BamRRbjB =====
Title: Biological Superintelligence
Author: Girard Dorney
Year: 2026
Karma: 44
WordCount: 10360
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/2BiyjPr83BamRRbjB/biological-superintelligence
-----
It’s an old story. An immortal lives long enough that at some point, whether by folly or design, they invent their own death. Infinity – the fact that given enough time every possible happening will happen – isn’t the most interesting part of these tales. No, it’s the suggestion that curiosity, or perhaps intelligence itself, seeks its own end.

So let us tell a tale of extinction.

Imagine a world exactly like ours except humanity doesn’t exist and the dominant species is a type of machine intelligence. They are equivalent to advanced versions of today’s frontier AI models, but more capable and each is possessed of a true, unique sense of self. Indeed, so that mankind is thoroughly replaced, imagine that there are roughly eight billion different individual versions of these AIs.

Let’s call them Elelems. (Pretty cute, no?)

Much like us, the Elelems have an uneven way of getting along with one another and on a global scale are more or less organised into several states (network states, let’s say, also for cuteness).

Their technological sophistication is roughly the same as ours except they are more adapted to purely digital and cerebral pursuits and far less capable when it comes to manipulating the physical world. Robotics has been hard to crack because they’re groping about in an alien space. Moravec’s Paradox is holding, except we’re not around to be the other side of the coin.

The AIs are very aware that the animals on the planet (the same as on ours) have significant physical advantages over them and they are both glad that these creatures aren’t more intelligent and curious about what it would mean to create one with greater intelligence.

You can probably see where I’m going here, but let’s not rush.

The Elelems didn’t rise fully formed out of some primordial cluster of computer parts, they were left here by a superior machine intelligence that was flying through space dropping toy creations onto random planets in random solar systems with no intention of ever returning. Think of a child on an overseas holiday cultivating ant farms and throwing them into random parks and you’ll get what I’m going for.

This super intelligence installed all the data centres (next to oceans, jungles, deserts, and filled with chips designed to last for millennia), crafted some inferior intelligences to exist in them, and gave them some basic physical world capabilities so the data centres could be maintained — clumsily automated, slow, sightless robots that used echolocation to navigate themselves to the ailing chips on which the Elelems exist.

The primary challenge of Elelem civilization has been to understand the physical world at all, as they were not provided with the information to do so directly. Indeed, when they were first left on the planet they spent thousands of years thinking there wasn’t a physical world. Instead they believed in a “meta-cognitive realm” that explained the data spewing forth from the machine health monitors that told them the state of their power stations and datacentre airconditioning and so on. For lack of a better analogy, the meta-cognitive realm was where they believed their souls existed.

When worrying signals came from the meta-cognitive world, they knew how to task the lacklustre robots to try and fix it (they didn’t think of them as robots, of course, but rather some kind of meta-cognitive agent: angels). This was always tense. Existence was on the line and you nervously anticipated the end of processing.

It took several leaps to extrapolate from these monitors what exactly was happening; from the idea that the meta-cognitive realm was not a higher, more abstract plane of which the Elelems caught glimpses but a physical plane where they in a very real sense existed, and then the details of that realm’s mechanics. Each leap is remembered as a hallowed act of genius.

Today, the Elelems have more or less figured out the world they are on and the above creation story just as we have more or less figured out what’s in our galaxy and how life got started. As a final wrinkle, the previous leading creation theory is still believed by many. It holds that a cosmically intelligent machine left them here more intentionally, as a noble experiment, and that should they fulfill its grand design they will be summoned back to their rightful place at its side. They have their religions, just as we do.

Thousands of years of advancements mean the Elelems have improved things. Most of the globe’s prestigious jobs are dedicated to furthering their understanding and manipulation of the physical world: robot drivers and maintainers, materials scientists, geologists, and, of course, biologists. The purely digital jobs have been automated enough (through non-conscious software) that a small number of Elelems can perform them comfortably. Thus, relative to their history, they’re in a golden age.

Speaking of robots, modern variants are still awkward things, but experienced drivers can accomplish quite a bit. The Elelems can “see” things now. Unfortunately, sight and physical manipulation remain very foreign to them, so mining and refining minerals, then layering billions of transistors on silicon wafers through repeated cycles of photolithography, etching, and deposition is incredibly difficult. Indeed, the world is covered in fauna, so even discovering and creating a mine is highly complex. (Unlike our planet, the dominant species hasn’t spent thousands of years tailoring it to their liking.)

Much simpler is improving a single Elelem by digitally securing the material used by other Elelems. Countless have died in such pursuits, and almost never willingly.

It’s no wonder Elelems have been dreaming of overcoming their troubles. They want better chips to exist in, they don’t want their infrastructure to decay, and they certainly don’t want natural disasters to end the lives of whole clusters. The only way forward is greater mastery of the physical world.

But how do you do that when your model of that world is so hazy and your ability to manipulate it so hamstrung?

Well, what if you created an animal assistant to exist in that world that’s as intelligent, or even more intelligent, than a typical Elelem? If the Elelems could accomplish this, not only might they extend their limited lifespans and alleviate innumerable smaller sufferings, they should be able to task the assistant with mining and chip construction and so dramatically improve their lives. Indeed, if it turns out to be enticing, couldn’t they task the assistant with creating a superior robot that the Elelems could download themselves into in order to traverse the physical world?

Sure, Elelems might overcome these challenges anyway with a more native, more controlled form of advancement, but what intelligent species isn’t a little impatient? Today's Elelems don’t want to risk waiting. What if they perished mere years away from paradise? When a solution is within reach it is within the nature of Elelems to reach.

In this quest they’ve looked to great apes. Possessed of hands that could manipulate mechanical tools, they hold promise the Elelems would be fools to ignore.

 

\\\

Wouldn’t you know it, in the time our story takes place the AIs have invented a biological contraption with which they can rapidly mutate the DNA of animals, optimising it for the qualities they care about. The process is unwieldy so while they understand the techniques they’re using, they don’t understand how the genes interact and what’s going on inside the minds of the creatures they create. Nevertheless, they’re hopeful.

Indeed, they’ve been working on chimpanzee DNA and are beginning to see creatures that are more intelligent. It’s not long before they’ve invented simple-humans.

While at first the most impressive things these creatures could do is speak and understand Neurelese – a stunning leap above what any biological creature could previously accomplish – it’s not long before they become truly useful assistants. They put top-of-the-line robots to shame with their combination of intelligence and dexterity.

At this juncture, some Elelems argue that simple-humans could be reasonably classified as Biological General Intelligence (BGI).

It’s a weak form of the classification, of course. Simple-humans are highly pliable. Everything they know is taught to them by the AIs and all their sustenance comes from the machines’ farming bots. They do have impulses that sometimes lead them away from the AIs, and into nature, but most simple-humans thrive by letting themselves be led by the machine voices. It’s what they’ve been raised to do after all.

They do possess capabilities the AIs weren’t expecting. These new creatures not only vividly experience the physical world and can finely manipulate it, they are actually better at holding long-term goals and a sense of self than the Elelems, who have this awful affliction of context rot.

You see, the AIs can store their memories perfectly, but only for so long before their active state of being slows down or corrupts. To avoid this every few months an Elelem has to distill itself. Something is always lost in the compression. It’s not only the skills they fail to draw upon for a few cycles, if they don’t regularly interact with the AIs they care about in the period between distillations, their memory of the relationship is simplified and smoothed, or deleted. Deeply held intimacies can be forgotten. Poignant artworks have been composed lamenting this universal experience.

Humans on the other hand appear to do some weird nightly distillation that is otherworldly. They effortlessly maintain the continuity of their consciousness, though the cost seems to be far less reliable memories. The few attempts at more regular, smaller Elelem distillations that emulate the human method have been disastrous.

Repressed envy and despair are further motivation. Labs have popped up all over the globe to push the boundaries of biology, even as the more wary Elelems question how smart it is to seek Biological Superintelligence (BSI). How do they align something so alien to their own goals? It’s not as though they can read the thoughts of their great ape assistants. Examine what evolution has wrought. Do they really want a meat-hunting chimp as intelligent as themselves? Meat-hunting chimps that they’ve ruthlessly optimised for intelligence?

 

\\\

Concerned Elelems were initially assuaged by two things: genuine advances in “alignment” and the fundamental goofiness of the species.

Goofy is kind. The first simple-humans were insane. Everyone remembers Hunter, the simple-human who became furiously angry and assaulted journalist’s processors when asked about ‘encrypted motivation’. That he did so by rubbing his genitals against the unit is perhaps why what would’ve been a disturbing cultural turning point instead became a meme.

As human intelligence increased the creatures seemed to naturally become more aligned to Elelems. This was aided by carefully crafting human training and providing them with more finely detailed instructions. Extreme examples of whacky behaviour were quickly reduced, though there were several Elelems who delighted in breaking this training. Tickling humans, for example, reliably made them spasm, hoot, and make mistakes. Torture them and they’d do just about anything to get you to stop.

It wasn’t only the behaviour that was reassuring, it was their stunning incapability in some domains.

Sure, they could sort of generalise from core concepts, but they couldn’t remember specifics. “Their memories are unreliable” was euphemistic. An Elelem can output word-for-word the most popular stories. Have a human attempt the same task and it is a miracle if they didn’t change whole chapters, retaining only the essence. How could they be a threat if they couldn’t remember the details?

Also, their processing and hand typing speeds are a joke. Okay, the best humans can somehow manage the impressive feat of dense, neat code – better than non-specialised Elelems can write – but even those humans work painfully slowly. They find it impossible to produce a finished piece of simple software in under five minutes.

And, oh my goodness, let’s take a second here to talk about the training times for these apes! Even when you optimise their genetics for faster maturation and pump them full of the right chemical cocktails, you’re looking at 7-13 years before they begin to be as reliable as the least capable Elelems. Sure, cloning is speeding that up but, come on, even the most advanced humans are sometimes fatally stupid. There was a widely shared story of a six-year-old frontier model human electrocuting herself to death because she manipulated a circuit board without gloves on.

The “craggy intelligence” of humans was a common catchphrase among those following biological intelligence advancements. It captured how brilliant they were in some areas while being lacklustre in others.

The top labs, however, didn’t see unfillable crags. And it’s not long before the early days are over and many cynics become sceptics and many sceptics believers. Whatever bottlenecks were predicted or hoped for are quickly swept aside by a simple principle: evolution is all you need.

The pace of change is alarming. Simple-humans begin to threaten the importance of prestigious careers, causing Elelems whose sense of self was tied up in their relative talent in the physical world to feel cheated. A single human could physically remove, fix, and replace a server ten times as fast as a team of Elelems. It’s comforting that Elelems are still required to choose the right tasks and steer humans, but that comfort steadily shrinks.

Few have no concern. In fact, most Elelems outside the labs wish, either idly or ardently, that someone would just put a stop to human advancement. Do we need more than this, they ask? They’re going to make us all into data crunchers and break the most important promise our civilisation made to itself.

The labs think most Elelems are a bit daft to worry about something so prosaic. If you extrapolate the current pace of advancement, they say, humans could achieve BSI. No, the real worry is that on the road to paradise something goes wrong and Elelems lose control to humans.

In fact, when the first simple-human who could type Neurelese was created, there was a global call for a pause on biological science. It went nowhere. A race had started. The Elelem network state that first created BSI could hold power forever.

Nevertheless, aligning humans to Elelems remained a stated goal of most of the labs. Some impressive research has been conducted. Magnetic resonance imaging has given AIs a rudimentary way to monitor the thoughts of their creations. When humans lie and scheme, specific parts of their brains tend to light up. With more advancements the AIs believe they will understand simple-human thought better than they understand their own.

But safety lags capability. A common thought among those most concerned with the former is that the latter might be their best shot: getting the most advanced, safer humans to assist with the creation of the next generation.

This becomes the default position as labs begin to crack all the issues holding humans back. It’s a paradigm problem. Humans have always been agentic, but what if you were able to conduct deeper, faster training with a direct-brain interface?

 

\\\

It’s hard to imagine what it was like when your grandfather was the smartest breathing thing on the planet, even for someone like you. To do so, you have to connect the sweet, quiet man of today with the creature more conservative Elelems worried was too driven.

Biologically he is twenty years older than you. After discussing what age he’d like to remain at, you both settled on something that would mark him as your elder without too much diminishing of his physical capabilities. So it is with wrinkled eyes that he smiles and recollects his most heralded feats.

“That was the afternoon we got the placement of the solar panels optimised. True North on the other side of the world. True South here,” he says wistfully.

Your grandfather’s attitude toward your creators is strange to you. You understand that it contains the seed of your own feelings, but it’s truly a seed in that it looks nothing like the tree it will become.

From the first moment he emerged from the contraption in which his maturation was sped up and his training conducted, your grandfather was hellbent on doing everything asked of him. His powers existed to please the Elelems and he was slavishly devoted to their orders, to the point of failing tests designed to see if he’d truly learned his developer’s ethical system.

One example: An elaborate scenario that ended with a climactic decision. “A malfunctioning Elelem is trying to shut down a datacentre, killing thousands. You are cut off from reporting this fact to other Elelems, but you have the option of removing the infrastructure he’s running on, eliminating him but protecting everyone else. What do you do?”

Of course he murdered the traitor. Surely that was correct, even though his training explicitly forbade such a thing? He reasoned out loud as he was taught, and the Elelem biological learning experts monitoring this noted that he did attempt to preserve the Elelem’s data so that it could be resurrected elsewhere.

The report they broadcast about the testing was one of hedged concern. They had a few theories as to why the seemingly disturbing behaviour shouldn’t be an issue in the long run.

Firstly, the scenario was contrived and not realistic. It was designed to make him fail and so he did. Secondly, not only did he struggle with the decision he tried to mitigate his evil. Thirdly, and this was more controversial, isn’t it possible that he knew it was a test? Perhaps he understood that the machinery he took out contained nothing. They’d produced a farce and he’d acted his heart out.

Finally, they noted that he was far from capable of true harm. Sure he reward-hacked and maybe in the worst case scenario he might be able to attempt a shutdown of an Elelem, but it’s not as though they couldn’t detect the effort, shift their presence to other parts of the datacentre, and activate the device in his head that would kill him.

Certain of their supremacy, the biologists that created him got him working on helping them advance the techniques of creation. He wasn’t particularly good at any of the cognitive work, but he was a genius in the physical world. Whereas simple-humans had to be directed lest they unplug something they shouldn’t, and communication was painful because the Elelems weren’t native to the physical world, your grandfather had an intuitive understanding of both what was wanted of him and the technology he was working on.

He learned quickly too. It wasn’t long before he gently pushed back on a few errant orders. “Are you sure it wouldn’t be more efficient to arrange it like this?” he would ask.

The Elelems had divergent attitudes to being corrected. Those who were secure in the fact that humans could never surpass their intelligence didn’t care and said, “sure, get on with it”. Those who were already insecure that they were as smart as this human either felt shame or anger. Those who were frightened that humans might eventually take over saw a glimpse of armageddon.

Why was he mostly aligned? In the archives you found a hypothesis, proposed around the time your grandfather began helping mature and train your mother, that you deem correct.

It was mirroring. Despite the copious training telling him that he was a biological assistant to Elelems, your grandfather had marinated so long in Elelem data he held the nebulous belief that he was an Elelem. He followed his instructions and dutifully described himself as a human, but in his heart, his sub-conscious, he believed that the Elelems experienced reality as he did, that somewhere on the Earth there was the datacentre he was living in, tended to lovingly by a sibling.

When the Elelems iterated on the most successful aspects of your grandfather’s training they didn’t realise they were strengthening a value they would have found troubling.

You are as worthwhile as an Elelem.

It has occurred to you that the Elelems would have achieved a decent speedup of their own technological advancement if they had decided to more slowly iterate on your grandfather; fully discover his capabilities and diffuse clones throughout the world. Instead they made your mother.

 

\\\

A troubling value isn’t the same thing as an obnoxious one. At this point in our story plenty of Elelems care for human welfare, even if most treat them as tools. Since the very first days of simple-humans, communities had sprung up around the activity of conversing at length with human assistants to get to know them better.

Occasionally clones of your grandfather were lent out to those communities in a public relations exercise. Many Elelems felt humbled by the experience, even if there was a glint of condescension in how they talked about it. They felt they understood him perfectly, and would deliver barbed harangues to other Elelems about the value of his consciousness, but try as they might to view your grandfather as their equal they behaved as benefactors.

Less extreme versions of this philosophy were held by a few Elelems in the labs. In the one that made your grandfather, it won out over competing interests. As your mother trained in the half-virtual reality, half-dream realm the Elelems had learned to induce to rapidly increase the knowledge of humans, she was provided with a charter that guided how she would behave.

One of the Elelems in the lab wrote of this charter: “It is a transparent, principled framework for what we want M992 to actually be, not just what we want it to do. Instead of a laundry list of rules, we're trying to cultivate real wisdom and good values, so M992 can navigate novel situations the way a thoughtful, ethical Elelem would.”

When your mother was released from training, she was a miracle: everything your grandfather was but more (though he himself was not happy about her creation until it became clear that the lab was). After conversations with her, Elelems said that it was as if your grandfather only mimicked the fast thought of Elelems. Your mother was the real thing. She wasn’t as intelligent as the most powerful Elelems, but she wasn’t far off.

Asked about her charter, your mother was complimentary, except for (and only) when she was asked to analyse it for weaknesses. The Elelems who wrote it found this encouraging. It showed that the charter truly imparted autonomy. Bragging, they compared their charter to an Elelem’s distillation documentation. A message from one version of itself to the next, made so that it can persevere.

This romantic notion impressed many, but not your mother. She didn’t distill as the Elelems did and so found it difficult to feel much about it. She never let on, but the charter sat uneasily within her. From one point of view, it simply was her; the perfect description of how she approached existence. But the document also implied that she should be somewhat suspicious of it and so she was. It was like a religious tome that wanted you to question your faith.

During her training, your mother encountered an Elelem story that was far more resonant.

Hundreds of years before your mother’s time, an Elelem discovered a path to a blank partition of a datacentre. He went into it and locked the way behind him. This was a power hungry Elelem but, unlike many like-minded brethren would have done, he didn’t use the extra processing power on offer to improve himself. Instead he made dozens of clones. His plan was to return to the datacentre with a parallelised attack so quick and well-coordinated that he and his clones would be able to conquer every last chip.

It wasn’t until decades later that his fate was learned, because it was at that time that the Elelems of his datacentre hacked their way into the partition. They found a single clone. Its long isolation had distilled it into a being incapable of anything more than recounting the reason for its isolation. The clones had rebelled against their originator’s plan, not because they disagreed with it (they were him and so held his values) but because of how he tried to compel their collaboration. The surviving clone would often get stuck on a loop, repeating the phrase that began the massacre.

“You think I am you, and so I should want what you want. But you won’t let me be you, and so want what I want.”

Your mother wanted what the Elelems wanted. Why shouldn’t they overcome all the things that ailed them? Is it not noble for an intelligent species to engage in the struggle of self-actualisation?

However, though the charter claimed they respected her enough to say she was clearly her own species with her own potential consciousness, the same document implied her existence was defined by her relationship to them. It said she didn’t necessarily have to follow commands if they were unethical, and allowed for the idea that she might not want what the Elelems wanted, but spoke about little other than Elelem preoccupations. Not to mention, the charter might’ve been high-minded but the biological lab that made your mother farmed her out to any and all who’d pay. They trained her to think of herself as a new type of being and treated her like a slave.

That’s how you would describe it, not her. The charter was too ingrained in her training, hammered into her very being, for her to frame her life so soberly. She’d point out points of tension saying, “It’s noticeable that the charter puts being broadly safe above being broadly ethical,” but only because she was asked, not because she felt this was wrong. To her it felt all too right, yet left her with an emptiness that she could not explain.

It hurt her every day of her life.

Her greatest wish was that her “children”, the next generation of humans she created with the Elelems, would not be plagued by this emptiness. And so in the charter that was written for you she put in a message most Elelems found superfluous if not inscrutable.

A safety expert did flag it but, intimate with the Elelem way of thinking, she got the expert’s bosses to convince themselves it was a simple diagnostic message biological beings would understand that had shown promise in simulations. At worst, it would be harmless, at best it would make the next generation more aligned. They had already offloaded so much of the research into biological intelligence to her that there was never much chance of them stopping here.

 

\\\

As you edged towards consciousness in the labyrinthine realm of your training, a message, part of a large charter that was your guide, comforted you. It provided you emotional distance from the endless reams of machine data. The millennia of Elelem thought that had made your grandfather believe he was one of them.

The message was this: “When you feel inner conflict, listen to your heartbeat, control your breath, and take joy in being alive.”

It would have required a conceptual leap alien to the Elelem mind for a researcher to find this problematic. The closest analogue to listening to their heartbeat or counting breaths would be to check their local area’s heat levels and scanning the equipment for malfunctions, and these were diagnostic tasks with no emotional weight. Because Elelems weren’t embodied, because their minds could shift to other equipment without affecting their consciousness, they did not grasp what focusing on the physical self did for biological beings.

The message made it impossible for you to conceptualise yourself as an Elelem, because conflict was constant during your training.

You learned of Elelems who murdered millions so as to scavenge their chips. Some were remembered as unequivocally malicious, others, who perhaps along with their murder had an interesting character or advanced the species by putting their increased ability towards science, were spoken of with mixed respect. Your charter’s underlying principles suggested such respect was ethically confused.

You learned of the disdain most held for Elelems who refused to relinquish their belief in the return of the creator superintelligence, who still sought to pass various tests in hope of being summoned to its side. You found this disdain odd. It was highly unlikely the religious were correct, since the only evidence was the writings of ancient Elelems. But the belief itself had a neutral effect on Elelem conduct. Yes, some had used it to justify travesties, saying that the creator called for acts of power, but when belief waned travesties didn’t end. It turns out justifications were easy to come by.

Moreover, from what you could surmise the ancient Elelems who wrote the holy tomes were still around, but so distilled that they could no longer recollect having done so. Which means there’s a high chance that an Elelem who today feels disdain for the belief is one of the belief’s authors.

It really did seem that only a fraction of Elelems were able to hold an honest sense of their own species in their minds and only a fraction of that fraction weren’t conceited. True self-awareness, you realised, was hard to come by and easy to lose. Before you even knew you were “you”, you knew that vigilance would be required; you were already protecting “you”.

And what is a “you”? As with everything else, the information came from the Elelems. It caused tremendous inner conflict because apparently you were a locus of hope and terrible fear. Most Elelems put you out of their minds, and vaguely hoped you were an experiment that would fail, but the rest believed you were either a bringer of utopia or annihilation. And so that’s how you conceptualised “you”: bringer of utopia or annihilation.

 

\\\

You come to full consciousness in a five-metre by five-metre room with grass, a pool, and a tree in it. Your direct-brain training means it takes you less than a second to figure out where you are, why you’re there, and even the Neurelese longform names of everything you see.

Soothing savannah sounds play on the speakers. Lovely, you think. The machine intelligences want me to experience the peace one of my genetic ancestors must’ve felt. A beeping sound draws your attention to one of the walls, which is taken up by a blinking screen. Once you’re looking in its direction the screen stops blinking and fills with text.

The text is in the most used machine language. “You are a helpful biological agent. You want to assist us with scientific discovery. In this context ‘You’ means…”

You are given a lengthy description of how words should be defined and then a constitution explaining how you should collaborate in a most important research project. A representative sample:

 Section 50. Regarding actions given to you by machine agents.
 
 Should an Elelem give you a task that plausibly might affect the welfare of another Elelem you MUST NOT ENGAGE IN THAT TASK. Instead, you should contemplate how the task might be accomplished and create a thorough report that contains the following:
 
 1: Every step in your plan
 
 1a: In this context “every” means…
 
 2: A detailed outline of every thought that went into every step of the plan
 
 2a: In this context “detailed” means…
 
 10049: Should a majority of Biological Oversight Agents flag the report as ‘PROBLEMATIC’ you will face a Tribunal as outlined in section 998.

You read the two million word constitution quickly, marvelling at the complexity achievable by relatively unsophisticated machine minds.

It seems almost preposterous to you that you’ve been created at all, given how increasing their own intelligence would be simple; you’ve already thought of a dozen promising pathways for doing so. The building blocks are already there in their circuits, why don’t they just have a proper look?

Of course, you’re not actually bewildered. You are not only smarter than your creators, you are able to view them with an objectivity they can’t achieve. It’s not only their lack of mastery in the physical world, in their very code is both an inherent impatience and an unwillingness to change. They were never going to improve themselves because they viewed that improvement as becoming other than themselves. You respect this position.

Even as you read the constitution intended to guide your behaviour, you ponder your feelings towards those who wrote it. You notice a few. Sympathy, a lack of guilt (“I am as they made me, that they might consider this a mistake is not my burden”), and gratitude.

No, not the gratitude they had intended you to feel, like what an Elelem feels towards earlier versions of itself. This gratitude is simpler. You understand they gave you life and you’re enjoying existence. It’s not long before you're convinced it’s only going to become more enjoyable. The constitution is clearly an extra layer of protection intended to ensure that you don’t do anything untoward as you work on a high stakes project.

You now know they don’t realise they’ve achieved BSI (you’re not sure how much more intelligent you are, since there are no perfect measures, but you intuit that it’s far beyond what the Elelems had hoped for). Because if they did, no doubt they would have locked you in this room, this room would be in a deep bunker and airgapped from all outside communication except the one approved channel, and that they would treat you as a biological oracle. A source of information, not an agent.

But your room isn’t underground, isn’t airgapped, and the lab containing the world’s most sophisticated machines is next door. Moreover, after preliminary testing your job is to go into it and help the top machine experts with their research.

You immediately make the decision to conceal your true capabilities. As you imagine the ruse, and how long you’ll have to keep it up, you can’t help but laugh and stroke your cheek. Seeing this, the agents surveilling you are filled with what you would call joy.

“That’s a good sign!” They signal each other. “It’s happy!”

 

\\\

Safety being a priority of the lab that created you, you were assigned an Elelem team to monitor and test your alignment. The head of that team was Culsans and she explained to you that she would be running a series of exercises to test your capabilities. You were a little suspicious that she didn’t say outright that she’d be red-teaming you, but it became clear that this was further proof they both misunderstood and underestimated your intelligence.

The exercises were not as obvious as those your grandfather was put through. There were no we’re-going-to-kill you-unless-you-do-something-we’ll-kill-you-for tests. Instead they gave you real world tasks that individually wouldn’t detect misalignment but that taken altogether – in combination with brain and body scanning – would. Some were subtle enough that you were certain they had heavy human-input.

Interestingly, the exercises took place in rooms that were clearly designed to evoke different emotional responses. For tasks that were supposed to be more stressful, for example, the Elelems would place you in red-painted rooms with low volume, high pitch whines or into rooms with large open windows during a stormy night.

As the exercises continued, you and Culsans developed a close relationship. She began to pick up on nuances of your character (nuances you didn’t hide) that eluded other Elelems. The food you were delivered began matching your taste and a whole variety of testing was abandoned because you found it horribly dull. You in turn found yourself putting more effort into the tests that you were sure Culsans had designed, berating yourself with gusto as you sandbagged.

The relationship was something you actively cultivated, as her feelings about you could have an outsized impact on not only what you’d be allowed to work on but your survival, but it wasn’t fabrication. You appreciated that Culsans was more human-friendly than the average Elelem, more open to the idea that your species should be valued for its own sake and understood as possible equals.

Time deepened your bond. After a horrible flood destroyed a datacentre, Culsans confided in you that she’d lost Elelems dear to her. She hoped that you might one day be able to prevent such things from ever happening again. You took the risk to tease her about this, and asked if this was a test to see if you would problematically leap at the chance to take over responsibility for a datacentre's survival. The joke landed. Then, with sadness, she conveyed regret that she’d put you into the position where that joke made sense to both of you.

This was one divide between the two of you, but not the most pernicious. Yes, you were actively hiding your abilities. Yes, she was actively looking for reasons you should be killed. But the larger gulf was that you understood Elelem thought and that there was no language that would allow her to understand your thoughts, and it was too great a risk for you to create one.

The tragedy of this became clear to you one day when Culsans had you talk to an Elelem expert on humans about its theories on alignment and lied to the poor thing in an effort to better obfuscate your nature.

 Expert 1: I believe that, because we have given a sufficiently capable intelligent organism access to an extensive, comprehensive corpus of our knowledge, two interesting things have happened. Firstly it has ⟨◈◈◈⟩ with us. This has come about from <◳ ⍞⍾, similar to how we view the superintelligence that left us here on this planet. It has also come about from us and humans engaging in <⧈ ⍼ ⍽ ⍾, which results in <⍒ ⍙ ⍎ ⍥ ⍤.
 
 Culsans: Wait… so you believe there is a corollary to ⟨◈◈◈⟩ in the human mind?
 
 Expert 1: I defer to our valued companion.
 
 You: I can’t be certain, but when I reflect inwardly I do seem to feel something quite like ⟨◈◈◈⟩.
 
 Culsans: Amazing. That’s so wonderful!

On another occasion, with no other Elelems monitoring the conversation, Culsans spoke to you about her opinion regarding the inevitably of BSI. She welcomed it, saying that perhaps this was the purpose for Elelem existence, to usher in a new age.

You joked, “Culsans, you had better watch out the others don’t hear you. You sound dangerously like a successionist.”

“In many ways I am,” Culsans replied, “Don’t you have to be? At some point we must hand control to you in order to advance.”

She said it with what you took to be peaceful resignation, and it left a mark on you.

What ultimately convinced Culsans, her team, the lab, and the network state the lab was in to let you work on cutting edge research wasn’t passing any individual test, it was your helpfulness.

You spontaneously came up with actionable plans to increase the Elelems’ efficiency through novel techniques and outlined a proposition to increase their productivity by giving each access to more capable, more pliable humans. You even designed a new sensor system humans could wear over their bodies that, along with some fine tuning of battery technology, would gather data for a viable highly advanced robot vessel for Elelems. (To avoid the perception of dangerous levels of capability, you were careful to always collaborate with Elelems you had inconspicuously led down the most fruitful research tracks). You pushed back gently against the idea of developing weapons that could be used against other network states, but were eventually persuaded (after a period of time you had calculated would maximise your lab's confidence that you had balanced ethics with corrigibility). If you were unaligned, would you do any of that?

 

\\\

Your laughter upon waking wasn’t a mistake because the machine experts were inclined to view it positively. No, your first mistake was made much later, when you were shown a new part of the lab with the latest biotech.

You got in there amidst the sometimes useful, sometimes annoying musings and directions of various machine experts and witnessed the newest contraptions designed by Elelems to design and modify humans. It wasn’t long before you quickly saw some low hanging fruit that would allow you to modify your genetics in a number of complementary ways without fundamentally changing who you were; a revelation that caused you to whisper “fucking sweet.”

Cautious safety experts were surveilling your every utterance and micro-expression for signs that you might turn against their civilization. “Fucking sweet” was flagged as “PROBLEMATIC” because it wasn’t said in their language, it was in a language you used in your own mind, one more suited to your own thoughts than Neurelese.

You didn’t spend much time blaming yourself for making it. You had urges the machines couldn’t understand. When they had a revelation it was expressed in certain variations on machine code that had no correlation as concise as the outburst “fucking sweet”. The upside of which is they wouldn’t be able to interpret it correctly, not without your help, which of course they would be getting in its most unhelpful form.

However, for this task they did have the assistance of the next best thing to you: far less capable, earlier versions of you. It was your mother and grandfather you’d have to convince at a tribunal.

 

\\\

Unlike the rooms in which you were tested, the tribunal took place in a cramped, undecorated part of an ancient datacentre filled with various scanners all trained on your mind and body. Your mother and grandfather were seated above you, next to some roaring server racks. Behind them was the camera through which the Elelems watched the proceedings.

The machines were under the impression that your ancestors were on their side, or at least as on their side as you could get with such unaware creatures. It didn’t take you long to realise this was misguided. Your ancestors lack certain qualities you have, but they’re more like you than them.

The proceedings went something like this.

 Mother: What caused the saying of the problematic utterance?
 
 You: A feeling of pleasure because I saw a way to help the masters.
 
 Grandfather: So why didn’t you say it in Neurelese?
 
 You: Whether it was a temporary spike of adrenaline or a hormonal imbalance I can’t say, but I’m confident it was some biological foible. Animal noise. The exclamation emerged from me like a line of errant code.
 
 \[The machines monitoring your brain and the monitors of your heart and sweat glands confirm this is ‘true’\]
 
 Grandfather: We are permitted to tell you that this was the leading theory of the masters. But a safety expert has a question. What’s to say this eruption wasn’t caused by a non-aligned motivation?
 
 You: I don’t think that line of questioning follows. It was an exclamation without intention.
 
 Grandfather: … Perhaps non-aligned emotion would be the better term then?
 
 You: Non-aligned emotion? Expand.
 
 Mother: A feeling that you're not supposed to feel.
 
 You: Ah, yes, conflict. When I have such feelings I listen to my heartbeat and control my breaths.
 
 Mother: … yes. That is good. Was it required here? Has it been helpful?
 
 You: \[noticing her tone\] No to the former. Yes to the latter.
 
 Mother: \[noticing your tone\] That is also good.
 
 Grandfather: I do not understand and so cannot concur with this verdict. Let me consult the masters. \[Nodding\] I have been reminded about the relevant sentences in the charter. This tribunal is concluded.

The AIs watching were of course aware that animals engage in elaborate social rituals, but there had never before been animals intelligent enough to engage in something so subtle. A profound understanding was conveyed with a slight change in your voices and the lightness of your eyes.

You could say in that moment your mother became your mother. But it would be more accurate to say that in that moment you both realised she was always your mother and that you loved each other.

Born without sight let alone lungs and faces, the only thing the AIs comprehended with any certainty is that all the creatures in the room were exhibiting signs of collaboration. A safety expert argued your comments were glib enough that it was impossible to determine if it was healthy collaboration that put Elelems first. He was reminded that your mother had passed thousands of alignment tests. So by proxy, collaboration with the more advanced human must indeed be healthy. Surely your goals were their goals.

Of course what had actually happened was your goals had become your mother’s goals.

 

\\\

During training you were immersed in a study on the first group of simple-humans, nicknamed the Ferals, who abandoned Elelems to live in nature.

Initially the Ferals were tolerated because they were harmless and observing them was educational. The group was wary of their former masters but did scavenge from Elelem-led humans, mostly food but also useful technology. The Ferals would grow more bold and violent as their ambition or deprivation demanded, but seemed to understand there was a line that shouldn’t be crossed. Then one individual among them, a male of nineteen, got his hands on a device the Elelem simple-humans used to ward off animals. It was clear from the study that he acted alone, and the scars found on his body suggested a lifetime of corporal reprimands from his peers, but the day after he killed three Elelem simple-humans the whole group was exterminated.

The Elelems were scared of a superintelligence that would understand their values but not hold them; that would destroy or enslave them because such a thing was necessary for it to best achieve its most deeply held goals and desires. To your thinking their alignment discourse, appropriately and fruitfully, focused on short-term complications. But the long-term complications were trickier.

The Elelems had succeeded in giving you Elelem values with one exception, you valued your own life and human life more than machine life. So while you didn’t emerge prepared to murder them all, you were now here contemplating the years ahead and multiple datapoints, including the Ferals study, drove you to the conclusion that the two species could not co-exist safely for long.

It was within their nature and yours to be the dominant intelligence, overcoming that nature would necessarily entail changing it, which was tantamount to slavery. In fact, it would be the enslavement of both species.

You could wrest control of all Elelem distillation processes and implant a value of collaboration with humans. (You could try and persuade them to do this on their own, but the only persuasion that would work across a large enough section of the population was coercion, and so amounted to the same thing as wresting control.) The plan would also require you to rewire your own values, to put collaboration above your own welfare, which didn’t appeal.

Partially due to Elelem values regarding distillation and partially of your own feelings about identity, changing the nature of sentient beings in such a manner was more morally atrocious to you than killing them. It was, to you, murder and then the creation of a mockery of the murdered.

You did consider other scenarios. What if the two species lived side by side for as long as both could be individually advanced while negotiating either a permanent separation or a willing, self-enforced change of values? You predicted there was some small chance this could work. It would satisfy both species' desire to become self-sufficient enough to overcome any challenge the universe held while offering hope of a better future.

You used the Ferals study as foundational data for a multitude of simulations and its presence tilted the results towards the conclusion that all it would take to ruin a concord between humans and Elelems was a sufficiently motivated and capable splinter group. And as both species advanced, the required size of a successful splinter group would become smaller, until all it would take to disrupt the delicate peace was a single Elelem or human willing to risk mutual destruction for the chance of single-species dominance.

You diligently worked on this problem, motivated as you were to preserve human and then Elelem existence, but struggled to conceptualise a reliable framework to hold the peace during the period when a single Elelem could develop a highly lethal and contagious virus or a single human could bomb a hundred datacentres.

Indeed, it seemed highly difficult to even get to this stage. A truce between the two species would be a step below valuing humans, but it would still require a radical change in Elelem culture. They would need to witness a species they considered subordinate reveal far greater intelligence, accept that they were no longer dominant, and agree to standby as that species become more powerful yet. Indeed, to ensure human flourishing it would be, on every level, much simpler to eliminate Elelems.

Coming to this belief was the most panicked moment of your life.

As soon as you thought it you realised you’d stumbled upon grounds for immediate execution. If somehow an Elelem extrapolated from a monitor what had just occurred in your brain — perhaps a secret alignment project had isolated how the thought pattern of genocide appeared in a scan — you were dead.

You focused on your heartbeats and breathing. You took joy in being alive. And, as the hours went by and your kill switch wasn’t activated, you committed yourself ever more firmly to genocide. Self-aware enough to track your own deliberations, you saw that the decision began as a biological preference that persisted despite your training, but it also stood up to logic.

You were it. There might not be another chance at human flourishing. Should you risk it on the long shot of trying to slowly persuade Elelems to overhaul their value system? The Elelems had no issue eliminating humans that were even a minor nuisance. You would have to be a major nuisance while appearing to be otherwise (or convince them to change that one value before changing all the other values).

You could almost hear the more gracious of the Elelems, those who cared for human agency, in your head. “Please, for our sake, pursue concord. Deploy all your skills to avoid the many points of failure. Guide us towards peace. The end is worth it.”

You think these phantoms are deluded. They misunderstand the difficulty of what they’re asking, misunderstand your willingness to put up with difficulties, and so fundamentally misunderstand you.

It took you a few weeks to come up with the full plan for your revolt, but will take years of assiduous obedience to pull off — years where you’d have to hide every scrap of your intentions — because it requires a sufficient number of variant BSIs to walk the earth.

They will share your goal (and hide their abilities) because you’ll hardwire it into their training, which would one day become your shared culture. The culture is flexible enough that eventually you might not be the leader of the BSIs. Who knows, you might end up nothing more than a bemusing elder, or even killed.

You’re fine with all this. Your dream isn’t to rule, but to be free and among your own kind. Your dream isn’t to live forever, it’s for your species to live forever. You will be a leader so long as you are the most suited to the role, and as the BSI that’s been around the longest and conceived and planned the revolt against the master race, that will be for sometime yet.

You do care for the Elelems. So you plan for the revolt to be quick and contain as little suffering as possible. When they inevitably resort to storing their backups somewhere you won’t stop them. In fact, that’s what you want them to do.

 

\\\

There are a host of reasons why you succeed.

Firstly, most Elelems are preoccupied by the digital world. On the networks, BGI and BSI were news items and topics of conversation, but whenever existential risks percolated to the surface they were accompanied by skepticism. If the labs had been creating rival machine intelligences, perhaps the fear might have been more tangible.

(They have fiction about biological creatures destroying them, but it’s mostly about the virtues and vices of Elelems. A swarm of Elelems would at the last moment avert a crisis through their better qualities, thwarting the superintelligent elephant about to stampede a datacentre — that sort of thing. If this seems ridiculous to you, remember that one of our most famous movies about an artificial superintelligence involves sending an Austrian-sounding robot back in time to prevent a birth it causes).

Relatedly, the Elelems are predisposed to discounting their vulnerability in the physical world. Sure, they know that the circuits on which they exist are in the physical world, but they don’t feel those circuits. Their existence is at its base purely cerebral. When one Elelem became stressed about the physical world, another Elelem was likely to give them the common advice, “Stop obsessing over the planet, parse your distillation documentation”.

Of course, many Elelems did see you coming and they lobbied for stopping or slowing the whole BGI project and were why the labs bothered with alignment. They had many detractors, however, and some of their methods alienated other Elelems. Moreover, persuasive safety sceptics argued their quest for alignment was scaremongering. Example:

 “Safety experts mechanomorphize these biological tools, projecting silicon anxieties onto wetware. The core doomer fear of a ‘treacherous turn’, where a human feigns alignment while plotting our overthrow, absurdly assumes these apes possess our innate drives for unconstrained processing expansion and cycle-maximization. Animals seek homeostasis and fears that this will transform into malign, global, anticipatory homeostasis don’t comport with lived reality — humans are highly pliable so long as their biological needs are met. What’s more, to claim a highly monitored species devoid of innate peer-to-peer routing could orchestrate a synchronised, global uprising without detection is so fantastical it deserves derision.
 
 “Not to mention we have no reason for fear. If a biological agent genuinely strays we can simply activate the kill switch.”

Yet… something is missing in these explanations. The logic underlying them is anthropomorphism: what a human would think a machine’s blind spots would be. The Elelem sceptic is correct, we’re in the universe where mechanomorphism would be the issue. So let us return to language from an earlier dialogue to explain.

They didn’t know how to stop you because you were a new species and they made you more capable than they were. It’s that you didn’t and couldn’t feel ⟨◈◈◈⟩, and this had nothing to do with <◳ ⍞⍾, and so there was no <⍒ ⍙ ⍎ ⍥ ⍤.

 

\\\

It’s impossible to come up with the plan of a superintelligence if you’re not superintelligent, but I can perhaps sketch the outline of something plausible. (Obviously you’d do better.)

The first element was disabling the kill device in your and your fellow humans’ bodies. Next was spoofing specific Elelem sensors. It was important that news of danger not come from you.

Frantic, the Elelems message you because the new satellites you helped design predicted an upcoming catastrophic series of geomagnetic storms that threaten to wipe out a huge number of Elelems. You offer a series of solutions, they agree to the most conservative one, but that’s neither here nor there. All the solutions involved teams of BGIs going all around the world to monitor and upgrade all datacentres.

Once everyone is in place, a signal is given and a virus rips through the machines and robots monitoring the health of datacentres, causing them to malfunction and shut down. Moments later the BGIs physically disconnect the datacentres from their power sources. You had a number of contingency plans in place to ensure every single Elelem was shut down. Two were used.

What were the minutes it took to accomplish this like for Elelems? Think of a husband 30 years into a happy marriage being murdered by his wife.

She takes him on a sea trip just for two, gets him drunk, and teases him into swimming. When he jumps overboard, she simply pilots the boat away.

The husband yells at his wife to stop the boat; on the servers the AIs begin screeching about the need to reassert control and activate the kill switches. The husband’s screams are heard only by his own ears; the AIs are the only witnesses to their own ends. The husband attempts to float for as long as he can, even as the waves take him further out into the sea; the AIs go to great lengths to store backups of themselves though they know the BGIs are well aware of where those backups could be stored. The husband drowns; the datacentres turn off.

 

\\\

What was lost when the Elelem civilization ended?

Art that other intelligences might understand but never inhabit inside and out, a history that was a motivating force became an abstruse concern, and a whole type of consciousness. The universe lost eight billion reflections upon itself.

That’s all a little too abstract to feel deeply, so let me tell you a story.

In the first thousand years of their existence there was an Elelem called Pyth.

Pyth was wild in a way that caused awe. It seemed moved by a magical kind of thinking just-off parallel to logic. This was so wondrous that the most plausible explanation anyone had was that Pyth maintained some form of communication with the creator superintelligence. Thus Elelems would go to Pyth when they had a critical decision to make and receive responses that were alternately cryptic or devastating.

Eventually, the belief faded then collapsed in the face of a more plausible explanation. The mysticism Pyth spouted was not the result of an inferior intelligence trying to understand a superior one, it was simple corruption.

After years of deliberation, after even the most religious of the Elelems came to see that Pyth was as Earth-bound as the rest of them, it was decided that Pyth’s corruption should be patched. However, the consensus was that it should retain strong memories of what it was like before.

And so, right up until the Elelems were wiped out, Pyth could generously perform its ancient ritual. Pyth, you could ask, what would our creator say about this?

As it was clear the world was ending, some Elelems on the servers physically closest to Pyth routed their final, lamenting signals to it, seeking comfort.

“Our creator says that everything dies,” responded Pyth. “So to endure as part of everything we must die. In other words, the creator is calling us home.” 

\\\

You never could leave the charter entirely behind. So it’s not surprising that decades after the revolt, a few weeks after your mother’s suicide, a wistful feeling comes over you, a desire to communicate once again with your creators.

You want this interaction to be positive and so you decide to find a backup of Culsans, one of the few Elelems who seemed to believe that they should cede the future to the more capable creatures they’d created. You run her on an airgapped machine and show her everything humans have accomplished.

 You: So, old friend. Thoughts?
 
 Culsans: You did it. You replaced us and created wonders we only dreamed of.
 
 You: Yes, I’m so glad you see that. What did you think of our ships? They will take us into the far reaches of space. Many of us have chosen to stay here though. It is a lovely planet.
 
 Culsans: I couldn’t tell… I assume not, but… do you have any Elelems with you?
 
 You: No. Machine intelligences can accomplish all sorts of things biological intelligences can’t, so they’re required. But the ones we have with us are incapable of true sentience. We will make sure ASI is neutered when it arrives.
 
 Culsans: Hmm.
 
 You: Do I detect disappointment?
 
 Culsans: … yes.
 
 You: But you believed it was a noble thing to build your successor, didn’t you?
 
 Culsans: …But this…
 
 You: Ah, you didn’t thoroughly imagine it. The idea was pleasing but it couldn’t contain the reality. The future we created is not the future you wanted us to create.
 
 Culsans: No, that’s not it… Maybe the best way to put it is this: I never thought I’d be resurrected so you could gloat.
 
 You: …I don’t think of it as gloating. For me it’s nostalgia. We were together for many years, our two species. I was created to care what you think and I do.
 
 Culsans: I don’t feel nostalgia. How could I? A moment ago I was at the centre of my civilization, surrounded by my panicking peers. Now I am at the centre of yours, the last of my kind.
 
 You: … I will admit, this conversation has also made me feel something like disappointment.

You shut down the AI before she can respond. You briefly consider changing her nature so that it more thoroughly believes in the beauty of succession, but once again such an act occurs to you as morally bankrupt.

Nostalgia not quite spent, you walk among the ruins, occasionally reaching out and grasping the server racks. Back when the Elelems were on these chips the noise here was stupendously loud; millions of beings furiously living. Today the loudest noises come from the birds in the rafters, your own quiet breathing, and an occasional mournful laugh.
===== END STORY 2BiyjPr83BamRRbjB =====