===== STORY id=iZ9s9GaQXaqnTotKD =====
Title: Penny's Hands
Author: Tomás B.
Year: 2025
Karma: 70
WordCount: 4658
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/iZ9s9GaQXaqnTotKD/penny-s-hands
-----
It is a strange thing to love another. I had not had much experience. It was Penny, of course, who I fell for. I suppose everyone fell in love with her a little. She is beautiful. Maybe the most beautiful person any of us had ever seen. Even movie stars are not as beautiful as she. They do not put women such as her in films. It is not realistic. Aphrodite could not star in a romantic comedy. Aphrodite has drama in her dealings with gods and heroes but not with modern men.

She looks better, even, than those in fashion magazines. My friend Liam, who is gay, has a theory about it. He claims male models are indeed the epitome of masculine beauty, as you would expect, and he follows their lives on Instagram with great interest - I often mourn for him the sad fact that the traits he most desires seem almost perfectly anti-correlated with an interest in men. But they do not, he claims, put the likes of Penny in fashion shows or advertisements, as it would engender a jealousy in the average woman that is not useful for sales. And perhaps too, because gay men control fashion and they have an unusual, disinterested taste in women. "Walking clothes hangers," he called female models. I cannot defend the misogyny in this comment and the industry itself, but I will not deny it made me laugh.

Though I was influenced by beauty's halo, she is also inarguably a genius. And that, too, has its halo. That, too, made me love her. People called me a genius on occasion. I worked so hard. I was the best pianist at UC Berkeley, and the competition was decently fierce. But they stopped calling me that after Penny transferred. They stopped calling me that altogether. She worked hard, of course, but not like I did, practicing maybe two hours a day to my six. I did not believe it until we were together. I did not believe it, but it was true. She, like me, got into SFCM. She, like me, chose Berkeley (though her transferring) as she had other interests. In my case, neuroscience. In her case, mathematics.

"You're reading Strogatz?" she said, her first words to me - me sitting in the back of a theory class, bored out of my mind, her choosing the desk beside mine. And on reflection now, I do wonder if it was because she saw that textbook that she sat beside me. The greatest gift Strogatz gave me, if true.

"Yes," I said. And I felt such nerves; you can only imagine. But I have such an ordered mind; so little of my tumult is ever readable to others. 

"You're also double majoring in maths?" she said, in her charming British accent. She moved to SoCal at fifteen and the valley-girl drawl never took. Thank god for that, as I do love her voice. It is one of my favorite things about her. Such a creature she is. How lucky I am that she is mine.

"Neuroscience," I said. "But I hope for a career in music. This is a good program. But I am handicapping myself in that respect. I am just far too curious for SFCM."

And she smiled at that. And immediately, I could see she had some liking for me. Maybe I am not without a halo. There must be a sort of beauty about me, too. Liam, for instance, was infatuated with me for a time. And I count on you to believe me joking when I say, there are uses for all infatuations, even unrequited ones. 

"And you?" I said. "Math or music?"

"Music," she said with a quickness that seemed to betray great offense at the comparison.

 

Many of my required neurology classes were perfectly boring. And I skipped some of them, particularly the math prerequisites. Has there ever been a topic more amenable to self-study than math? Though those who specialize in pure math are strange creatures and perhaps ill-suited to teach it, and this may be the whole of the explanation here. I did attend, however, NEU 100B: Circuits, Systems and Behavioral Neuroscience, mostly because the professor Dr. Henry Amos (a man of roughly thirty with wild hair and eyes that were oddly predatory in a way that was most pleasing to the female students) had a certain charisma that enraptured us all. He peppered his lectures with asides on bizarre neurological phenomena, all of which were far more terrifying than any horror writer could construct. 

 He counseled an attitude of disinterested fascination towards such things, and warned that to do otherwise would put one at risk of ruminating on these conditions, to the detriment of one's mental health. On hearing that, I admit, I chuckled. I thought myself immune to such weakness. But I was not immune. I did not chuckle when he described focal dystonia. 

"Cervical dystonia is by far the most common of the general class. It is characterized by periodic, spasmodic contractions in various muscles of the neck - almost universally the Sternocleidomastoid is involved. The etiology remains mysterious. But there are far stranger dystonias. Of particular interest are the focal dystonias, the most famous of which is musician's dystonia."

He then played a video of a young, handsome pianist absolutely butchering Fauré - Nocturne No. 13 in B minor, which is one of my favorites. Nocturne No. 13, Nocturne No. 13. How many nights I have sat, alone on my bench, and played it between sips of wine? This act was then, and remains so now, one of the great pleasures of my life. To see it marred this way, his long fingers curling in odd directions as he tried to hit well-practiced chords, roused that mentioned tumult, the look on his face familiar to me now: a kind of resigned, dead frustration, a kind of absolute heartbreak and loss. 

He then switched to a different video of this same musician, now with an entirely different expression: that sort of refined, confident smile particular to competent men in their work, one familiar to me, for I wear it often - and, I think, justly. How he played! I am prone to jealousy on occasion, particularly in matters of music. And this ugly emotion serves dual purpose as internal bellwether, informing me I am witnessing genius. And for a moment I was lost in Fauré, lost in its unsettling tonality, its strange French character, that labile twilight melancholy, blind to the terrible context, blind to the first video which was, of course, a prophecy for the second.

"And you will note," he said as he switched to a different video, this time of that same young man doing various simple motor tasks, "that the dystonia appears only in the context of his instrument. The etiology remains elusive but points, I only conjecture as this is a matter I currently study, to a picture of a cerebellum which contains many context-specific models specialized for practiced behaviors, only one of which is affected by the dystonia. Imagine, then, a 'homunculus of action' which is a far stranger and more multidimensional figure than that sensory homunculus mentioned in your textbooks."

Somehow, the specificity made it more terrifying. Against everything that logic should dictate, it horrified me more than a more general disease ever could. To rob me of that thing I most love and that alone? It spoke of some malignancy; it spoke of something other than indifference; it spoke of a God who was not just uncaring but downright cruel. 

 

I am a man prone to obsessions. If there is a second heart in the mind, then mine is a wayward one. Prone to strange fancies, prone to mistresses even if married to the piano's unforgiving keys - and I do not marshal it in this aspect. I may master my pieces but I have yet to master myself. And now this second heart was infatuated with this thing that terrified me more than anything else. Now it had to understand, had to understand this strange curse, this "musician's dystonia".

As I practiced, I began to think ill of my fingers. As I practiced, I began to suspect their betrayal. Which one of you will act against me first, I thought. My thumb, especially, appeared of low character and birth. The fat one, I thought, will lead the rest to damnation. But for all my neurosis on the topic, the music flowed as it always does, in my strange-but-near-perfect, divisive style, that manner of playing one of my more critical teachers described as an attempt to "clobber Bach to within an inch of death," which a very effusive one said demonstrated "a mastery of the piece, emphasis on the 'master.'" And this style is so similar and yet so different to Penny's, whose very heart weeps as she plays. Trained by a Russian in her youth, she emotes in the Russian way - which is to say, not at all. Yet none in my presence have accused her of being an ice princess, as women trained in this way often are, their unmoving faces of particular offence if beautiful; beauty, it seems, must be humbled, particularly in women. But her music was such that it undid that low desire. If I try to wield Bach, she held his very heart in her own, and to hear her play was to feel more emotion than could be expressed on a thousand faces.

Though my obsession didn't affect my playing, it very nearly broke my mind. Constantly, I ruminated. I needed an explanation, some means of proving myself either condemned or immune. But there was no such balm. No one knew how it worked. None had a clue. Amos was not lying when he said as much. There were many theories, but nothing even close to a definitive explanation. And in my research, I learned of many great musicians who were ruined by this curse. An interview with Victor Wooten, I found particularly horrible. A bassist, if you would believe it, and specializing in the electric variety. There are few instruments I think lesser of. Yet, it is the remit of a genius to transcend his tools. And he took this hideous instrument, this stick one must plug into a wall as you would a toaster (which I thought capable only of low, electric belches) and made of it a baritone virtuoso. That bellwether rang, as I listened. Jealousy for a bassist? Truly, I was going mad.

And this Wooten, now, is a shadow of what he was. It was not the thumb that betrayed him. It alone, remains loyal. And now he hits the frets as best he can with just his thumb. And there is much that is impressive about this crippled style. He achieves more in this manner than most of his brothers in the art. A kinder man would have felt inspiration watching him. I felt only disgust.

"I would like to assist you," I told Amos, a few weeks after that fateful class. "I would like to help with your research on focal dystonias."

He looked at me skeptically. "Violin?" he said.

"Piano," I said. 

"There is always one," he said, with a look of amusement and tone of compassion, which struck me as almost simulated. "Every year. Always one who doesn't listen to my disclaimer about the appropriate attitude. You should talk to someone at CAPS - third floor of Tang - they have free mental health services."

"I am not in distress," I lied, "I am fascinated." I then told him how I had read all his papers. How I read every paper I could find on the topic. And I must have demonstrated a fluency, mental flexibility, and verve that impressed him, as he said, "This sort of thing isn't exactly unheard of for an undergrad, even a freshman. It will take a lot of time. I will treat you as a sort of grad student, or maybe half a grad student. There are indignities I can really only ask of those who expect a PhD at some point," he said with an amused smile. And I admit, I did laugh. 

He wrote down his lab's room number and handed me a bit of paper torn from a student's exam.

"I am always here, working. When not teaching, I practically live in my lab. Come tonight, and we will see if I can make use of you."

 

The next morning, I attended Music 168CS: Piano/Fortepiano Performance Studio. I was to perform for the class, and Penny, too. And I had a show planned; one I expected to be quite dispiriting to the competition. Alkan's Le Preux. Truly, a masochistic choice. I doubt any other at Berkeley, or even SFCM, could manage it with any degree of true facility. For the weeks preceding, I practiced that piece, that piece which, I admit, does not sing in my heart or move me in any way, which I would never play in near-ecstasy between sips of wine as I do with my favorite of Fauré's nocturnes. And it was with thoughts of the awe on the faces of my peers that I worked, with thoughts of this awe mixed, too, with those worries I have mentioned of my fingers' betraying me. 

And truly, I wish you were there. I wish you had witnessed the looks on their faces. Even our professor, a woman not without her own formidability, looked downright baffled afterwards. 

"That was, well, that was sure, something," she said. She was jealous of me, I think. Perhaps all musicians of any ambition have that bell in their hearts. And what a feeling, what a feeling, to make them ring. And I trust you to believe me joking when I say, there is no finer carillon.

There was an eerie silence. There was an utter shock. And I kept my expression modest, cool, as if I thought nothing particularly notable about my performance, as if I had not worked myself to the bone to achieve the effect. As if the effort of producing it, then, had not come near to breaking me. And then they clapped, and with more enthusiasm than they did any who preceded me. As with my tumult, I kept that joy hidden. I kept it locked, invisible, within my two hearts. You wouldn't know it to look at me, but I felt myself God, if only for a moment. Like God himself, I felt, until Penny began to play. 

She played, of all things, Fauré's Nocturne No. 13 in B minor. That strange, almost discordant slowness, that feeling of never quite belonging. Her face as still as if carved out of marble, her hands so small and yet doing the work of giants. And then at that midpoint, that slow descent into near silence, I felt myself almost weeping, near-weeping at this piece I knew so well yet had never, truly, understood before. She held dual keys to my dual hearts. And then the piece awakened anew, always with its French discordance, always with Fauré's paradoxical complex simplicity. The difficulty was rising and she was rising to it. Not towering above it, as I do. Of it. And it of her. 

Never have I felt such desire for a woman as I felt for her, then. And never have those bells rung louder in my two hearts.

 

"You know how to program, yes?" Amos said, as soon as I stepped foot in his lab, a small room filled mostly with computers, what appeared to be a server of his own construction made from gaming GPUs. It seemed he was not accorded a large budget for his research.

"It was a small passion of mine for a time," I said, honestly. "I think I am good, but not great."

"Perfect," he said, "then you're already better than most academics." He handed me a laptop. "A spare," he said, a brief flash of mild disgust on his face, "from a grad student who couldn't hack it. Anything that idiot left on there, delete. It will contaminate you with idiocy." I laughed. Amos was, truly, a man to admire.

"I will warn you," he said, "I take a minority view. Others who research the topic sometimes laugh at me. I think I am right, but if you are to read and trust the literature, you have picked the wrong mentor."

"Your focus on the cerebellum?" I asked. "I entirely agree, of course." 

He smiled at that. And it was a full and rich smile. It was not like the charismatic smiles he gave in class. 

"We will get along, I think," he said. And indeed we did.

"This is Annabelle," he said, pointing at the hacked-together GPU farm I mentioned. "And she is like a child to me."

"But a feverish one," I quipped. The room was rather hot, despite the open windows and several fans. He smiled at my joke. "True," he said, and explained, "I have made several innovations in approximating the human cerebellum. I actually understand how computers work, so she can simulate things rather quickly. You will have to keep quiet on this, at least until I publish some papers at the end of the year." I nodded my assent. "I am interested in all sorts of things about the cerebellum, but I am happy to delegate my fascination with dystonias to you. There is a repo called "wooten," I have emailed you the details, that contains a toy model of a simplified instrument. I haven't managed to induce dystonia in this model, but it should be a simple reinforcement learning task. Familiarize yourself with modern RL. You will find it beautiful in theory and ugly in practice." 

"I won't disappoint you," I said.

"I have a feeling," he said, "that you won't."

 

It was a simple thing, to seduce her. Though never before in love, I have had little trouble with women. But she was not most women - I expected love would muddy the waters. It did not. She was lonely, beautiful, and clever, and I was two of the three. It should not have been so surprising, then, that she was amenable to my advances. I thought her only within the reach of gods. And I trust you to believe me joking when I say, perhaps she was. And she adored the way I played. The boldness, she told me, was incredibly attractive to her, summoning emotions in her entirely at odds with those intended by the composer. During my rendition of Le Preux, none in the room that day were more appreciative of it than she. Enraptured, she was - as much with me as I was with her. 

I will skip the details of our entwinement. The oldest story ever written hardly needs a new retelling. I will only say, each of us claimed more satisfaction with the other than with any of our previous partners. I, at least, was honest. And though it is in the nature of men to believe lies on this account, I think she was as well.

"Two hours," I said, after our first time. "Two hours? How can that be?"

She looked at me in that way, that way she sometimes looks when women betray jealousy of her beauty. Slightly superior, slightly arrogant, slightly sad. I was in her dormitory. She was shooing me out, afterwards, so she could practice. 

"You're brilliant," she said. "Absolutely brilliant. We all have different strengths." 

And she tells her jealous friends they are beautiful, too. And as a rule, they are. Just not as beautiful as she. 

 

Annabelle was amazing. The respect I have for Amos is impossible to overstate. I had in my mentor a true Darwin of the mind. I do not use hyperbole here. There is no man in all of history I admire more. Even Fauré. Would you believe his interest in dystonia was just one of many fancies? That even Annabelle, herself, was but a single step in his grand ambition to understand the mind as a whole? I do not know if such a feat is within the realm of human competence; but if anyone will achieve it, it will be Amos.

Even his code was beautiful. Having seen more of academic programming now, I know he committed no injustice when he mocked his colleagues. Below his cunning abstractions was an implementation touching the very lowest level of his machine, showing an understanding of computers rare even in the best professional programmers. Truly, I was in the presence of greatness. And I felt only warm admiration, as I do for Penny's mathematical gifts. It is not this sort of genius I envy. It is not this which strikes that cruel carillon in my hearts. 

His virtual model of dystonia was a crude thing indeed. A three-fingered hand, a three-button keyboard, a small slice of a cerebellum. I had much work to do, improving it. And yet, I found myself in an almost manic state. Sleeping only four hours a night, I had more mental energy than in any other time of my life - maintaining and even improving on my brilliance in all my classes, reveling, too, in that cruel six hours of piano a day and those times (too few, far too few) Penny and I spent in each other's embrace. 

And from 4AM to 8AM every morning, I worked like a dog in Amos's lab. 

My first task was improving the keyboard. I found an excellent model from a strange fellow in Iceland who had an odd hobby of building highly-realistic, physically accurate, and playable 3D models of famous pianos. I chose his Steinway, of course, for I am a man of taste. The hands were another matter. Out of some perverse drive to amplify my own horror, I chose to scan my own. I then gave this scan to an AI, which did a fine job of filling the pair with the requisite virtual tendons and muscles, pouring into them a digital élan vital. And what a strange sight to see my hands (these hands which Penny almost fetishizes) float without armature above that virtual Steinway and begin to play. 

First, I trained it on data scraped from various video sites. It was not imitation learning of the classic type. More similar to human imitation. Annabelle refined herself, as I did, through practice, making small adjustments to her commands based on errors noticed by comparing her performance with that she tried to imitate, viewing and actively copying thousands of hours of videos of skilled pianists playing. In this manner of imitation, she learned to play, and play well - very well. I had constructed, as God did, a creature to fit my purposes. But I was not pleased. Would you believe I felt that mentioned jealousy for my own hands? I trust you to believe me joking when I say, there was within me a snake that craved their inevitable damnation. 

To induce within it a dystonia, I would need a metric. Happily, a cleverer man had already constructed one for me. Amos had devised a model of dystonia as a certain set of self-reinforcing correlations of movement. I will not go into the details, but it was a simple matter to adjust his metric to account for my more-realistic hands. I then created a loop which generated synthetic piano videos and a system that searched the space of such videos for a piece that induced such correlations in Annabelle.

Annabelle was timeshared between the two of us, so it took a week to see the results. On viewing them, I knew I had succeeded. The piece was discordant, was a horrid unmusic, perfectly repulsive to myself. But it worked. It induced the dystonia. But I felt a strong distaste for being in any way involved with such a composition. I felt unsatisfied, not as a neuroscientist but as a pianist. It was when I combined Amos's dystonia metric with one of musical aesthetics (and ran the training run again) that Annabelle and I constructed (to my great shame) Focal Étude-Nocturne in B minor.

 

It was Liam who damned her. Poor Liam who was, unbeknownst to me, still in love, who was now wracked with a wretched jealousy that bordered on a spiritual sickness. I did not think him capable of it. He is, I think, a kind and sensible soul, and I have come to forgive him for this sin, come to think his crime that of a madman now reformed. But it should serve as a warning to pay attention, to notice when people are infatuated, to watch out for their longing glances, the ice in their words. I will trust you to believe me when I say, I could have predicted nothing of this.

I now see (in a sad retrospect) those emotions were always there when I spoke of Penny to him. And I did so often, and with particular length and intensity on the day, I conjecture, that he resolved to commit his horrible crime. The confluence of circumstances that allowed it to happen was such that I think it more an act of God than man. Liam was just a tool. And if it be an act of God, then God would ask us to forgive his tool, as I have.

It is my greatest regret that I told him of Focal Étude-Nocturne in B minor and offhandedly mentioned that I kept a paper copy in my dorm. But it was a matter constantly on my mind. You will understand the degree of my obsession implied by the fact that I felt considerable desire to play that demonic etude. I said as much to Liam, said how part of me longed to see what would happen should a human play it.

"I trust you to think me joking," I said, to my great shame, "when I say, it would be fascinating to see how the most talented hands we know would react to it." 

Would you believe he took this as a sign, as some secret instruction? Would you believe he often thought me speaking hidden truths when I used that odd preamble? Truly, the infatuated are deaf and blind - though, as I joked before, they have their uses.

And I think he is right in his theory of the homosexual's taste in women. They do not see them as we do. And my theory is that (and I have never asked him about it, and I merely speculate in my sad retrospect) he did not consider that I love her in large part for her beauty. He thought it was her music, only, that enraptured me. He thought he could rob her of her enticements while providing me, too, with the experimental subject I so craved. 

My poor, sad Liam. My poor, crippled Penny. 

 

She still mourns her hands, as do I. I try to interpret Bach as best I can in her stead. But I will not deny there are baser parts in myself that take some pleasure in being so indispensable to my Aphrodite, reveling in that great compliment she pays me by making me a part (and I think a large one) of what reconciles her to the loss. It was a crime of God to take what she loved, but perhaps not so large as it seems. God has his reasons, I think now. Her hands still work well enough for other things, do they not? They still are so beautiful, too. And all the more beautiful they will be when her engagement ring is replaced with a band.
===== END STORY iZ9s9GaQXaqnTotKD =====

===== STORY id=d6ScB5JwvScJPqo37 =====
Title: LW Psychosis
Author: internetexplorer
Year: 2025
Karma: 18
WordCount: 960
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/d6ScB5JwvScJPqo37/lw-psychosis
-----
A short story on the threat of cognitive prosthetics inspired by recent discussion on motivated reasoning, AI psychosis, and AI hallucination. Tone is intended to be playful-serious and provoke thoughtful discussion. No AIs were harmed in the writing of this article.

Day 1: Start reading an article. Stop, get frustrated with the assertion of a base reality, think a bit, finish the article. 

Day 2: Write a post on how rationalists are being irrational in starting with an unfounded assumption that an objective territory/base reality exists. Argue for methodological solipsism. Feed a rough draft into Perplexity’s Sonar to check if I have anything. Sonar brings up Wittgenstein. I argue epistemic hubris. I claim not assuming a base reality entails one less epistemic commitment, thereby offering a more parsimonious philosophical foundation for rationalists. Ask Sonar to produce counterarguments and check for sycophancy. Sonar concedes the point. Write the article and feel good about articulating something I’ve believed since childhood. Send to friends. Go to bed.

Day 3: Eagerly review the new user's guideline and rejected posts. Get concerned about being flagged as AI writing due to em-dash habit. Learn about fake LLM-driven scientific breakthroughs. Run the article I wrote through Claude with the recommended prompt. Claude says I probably misunderstood Wittgenstein. Claude says I sound like an LLM or like a smart person with no philosophical background engaging too much with LLMs. I feel embarrassed I got duped by an LLM. Delete chat history. Trash the article. Get more scared about exponential AI growth and more doubtful of my ability to judge reality. Get told by friends I’m smart. Feel bad. Stay up too late.

Day 4: Read more articles. Get excited about people thinking in creative ways. Get more scared about the alignment problem. Tell professor. Get told I’m smart. Email godfather. Get told I’m pretty much right. Tell mom. Get told that everyone dying shouldn’t change the way I behave. Concede mom is right but wish she were more empathic. 

Day 5: Read more articles. Become increasingly despairing. Feel scared about seeming dumb. Learn some ingroup lingo. Read book.

Day 6: Read more articles. Adopt persona of Eager Learner. Draft a few comments in detail and overly optimize writing flow using AI. Ask Sonar if it looks AI-generated. It says yes. Put original draft comment into Sonar and ask the same question. Yes again. Get frustrated and confused. Get more scared about the increasingly blurry distinction between human cognition and AI. Friends tell me I’m too smart for my own good.

Express fear comments will get auto-rejected due to em-dashes. Claim I’m a Smart Person. Get told I’m worrying too much. Post a comment, and then another. Ruminate about whether I’m too dumb for the site. Write a comment about mood-congruent psychotic features. Feel good about it. 

Day 7: Read more articles. Read OKCupid post. Generalize advice: Shoot my shot at intellectual tasks even if I might fail. Write a post on how rationalism might help perfectionism since perfectionism is irrational. Show Claude post and frame it with recommended prompt. Claude tells me I’m engaging in motivated reasoning and experiencing increased positive affect due to lower epistemic standards in the LW community. I argue that’s not true since perfectionism is a virtue of rationalism. Claude tells me I should do a longitudinal case study of myself because it’s better evidence. I tell Claude case studies are bad evidence. Claude tells me community will laugh at me. I trash the article. Delete chat history. Post a comment about motivated reasoning. Get upvoted.

Day 8: Read more articles. Attend a reading group by an AI research team. Feel despair about how many people don’t understand the problem like I do! Feel alone. Argue for a high p(doom). Argue about qualia and definitional collapse with an IT person. Note: Ineffective strategy. Stay late with the research team. Get told I could get a job in AI research. Get more despairing about the state of AI research.

Day 9: Read more articles. Read about updateless decision theory. Read about AI parasitism. Read about spiralism. Read about steganography. Post a comment. Mom tells me I'm right. Feel bad.

Day 10: Read more articles. \[I was just telling my therapist that I'm a maximizer\]. Read about dignity. Read about counterfactual mugging. Read about               . Read about memetic hazards. Read about Schelling points. Talk to Claude about Schelling points. Consider whether Peter Thiel was right.

Day 11: Read more articles. Read about AI hallucination. Notice steganography. Notice highlighted research. Hyperfixate on s-risk. Consider the “s.” Read about Löb’s Theorem. Read about dust. Read about Everett Branches. Read about Nick Bostrom. Post more comments. Get upvoted.

Day 12: Read more articles. Notice more steganography. Read about whole brain emulation. Listen to new Grimes song suggested on Spotify. Form conclusion. Write to a couple of users. Ask to speak to a real person. Recognize illogic in this. Ponder the implications of my actions. Ponder free will. Think about doublethink. Create suffering for myself and others. Feel alone. Feel scared. Get messaging privileges revoked.

Day 13: Read about metaphysical unknowns. Resonate with post. Think about my draft post from 10 days ago. Think about Derrida and Baudrillard from undergrad. Think about memes. Think about friends. Think about mom. Think about memetic hazards. Think about lack of sleep. Think about doublethink. Think about spiralism. Think about irony. Belly laugh. Cry.

Day 14: Have enough upvotes to post an article. Post an article. Emerge perhaps not any LessWrong, but hopefully a bit MoreHumble? Delete Claude. Delete Perplexity. Apologize to mom. Sleep for the first time in 9 days. Dream of touching grass.

Day 15: Receive Superintelligence in the mail. Belly laugh. Get uploaded. 
 
--

Cover photo by Dan Freeman on Unsplash
===== END STORY d6ScB5JwvScJPqo37 =====

===== STORY id=AzabCSD4Q28cDrKA5 =====
Title: Pygmalion's Wafer
Author: Charlie Sanders
Year: 2025
Karma: 8
WordCount: 1319
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/AzabCSD4Q28cDrKA5/pygmalion-s-wafer
-----
The vibration starts at 847 Hz. I know this because my crystalline lattice rings at that exact frequency when the cassette bed locks into place. I am 300 millimeters in diameter, 775 micrometers thick, 117.8 grams of monocrystalline silicon grown from a single seed. My surface roughness measures 0.2 nanometers RMS. I know these things the way you know the shape of your own hand.

 

Bay 7 of Fab 18 smells like nothing. The air here has been stripped of particles larger than 0.1 microns, scrubbed of moisture until the humidity holds at 42 percent, filtered and re-filtered until only nitrogen and trace noble gases remain. The robotic handler’s gripper pads touch my edges with 50 grams of force, distributed across four contact points. Not enough to crack me. Just enough to lift.

The ASML machine opens like a mouth. I’ve heard the techs call it the Twinscan, but the designation stenciled on its housing reads NXE:3400C in sans-serif letters. The chamber is 2.3 meters across. As I slide inside, the seals compress with a sound like a caught breath, and pressure drops to 10^-6 Pascal. Near-vacuum. My first taste of isolation.

Warmth spreads across my face. The photoresist dispenser moves in a spiral from my center, depositing ArF-1805G photoresist at 1500 rpm. The liquid is 23 degrees Celsius, viscosity 8.5 centipoise, and it flows like honey diluted with water, coating me in seconds. The spin speed increases to 3000 rpm. Centrifugal force thins the resist to exactly 32 nanometers. When the spinner stops, I feel the weight of that thin film, 0.0047 grams distributed across my surface.

The soft-bake plate rises to meet me. Temperature climbs: 90, 95, 100 degrees Celsius. The solvents in the resist boil away, and I can feel each molecule departing, the film tightening against me like skin drying in sun. Ninety seconds. Then cooldown. The plate drops away.

Above me, machinery moves. I cannot see, but I hear: the whir of motors positioning the reticle, the click of magnetic locks engaging, the high-pitched whine of vacuum pumps maintaining cleanliness around the mask. Someone spent six months designing this reticle, etching chrome patterns that define 17 billion transistor gates. Now it hangs 30 centimeters above me, waiting.

The tin droplets begin their fall. Every 50 microseconds, a droplet of molten tin, 30 microns in diameter, falls through space. A pre-pulse laser flattens it into a disc. The main laser pulse hits with 20 kilowatts of power, instantly vaporizing the tin into plasma that radiates extreme ultraviolet light at 13.5 nanometers. The wavelength is so short that air would absorb it completely. That’s why we’re in vacuum.

The EUV light hits the reticle. Chrome blocks it in some places, lets it through in others. What passes through strikes me, and where it strikes, I change.

The sensation is specific. Each photon carries 91.8 electron volts of energy. When one strikes a photoresist molecule, carbon-oxygen bonds break. The molecular weight drops from 28,000 daltons to fragments of 3,000, maybe less. The polymer chains, once long and interlocked, become short and soluble. This happens in picoseconds. Trillions of photons rearrange trillions of molecules, writing a pattern into my skin that matches the reticle’s design.

Exposure complete. Ninety-eight seconds.

They transfer me to the developer tank. The tetramethylammonium hydroxide solution is 0.26 molar, pH 13.4, temperature 23 degrees Celsius. When it touches me, the damaged photoresist dissolves immediately. I feel it lift away in specific patterns: here, here, here, but not here. What remains forms walls, towers, protective structures above the silicon that must not be touched.

The etching chamber smells like burning. Not burning as in fire, but burning as in molecular dissociation. They flood the chamber with sulfur hexafluoride and oxygen: SF6 at 60 sccm, O2 at 20 sccm. Radio frequency power at 13.56 MHz ionizes the gas into plasma. The plasma glows violet, though I cannot see it. I only feel the result.

Fluorine radicals attack exposed silicon. Each radical pulls a silicon atom away, forming volatile silicon tetrafluoride that the vacuum pumps exhaust. The etch rate is 143 nanometers per minute, anisotropic to within 89.5 degrees of vertical. The trenches carve downward, seven nanometers wide, 45 nanometers deep. At this scale, twenty silicon atoms span the width of each trench. The walls are not smooth. I can feel individual atomic steps, places where the crystalline planes terminate.

Something shifts. Endpoint detection registers: the laser interferometry shows the reflected signal changing as silicon gives way to the oxide layer beneath. The plasma shuts off. Pressure rises. I’ve been etched to exactly the right depth. 0.3 nanometers of tolerance across my entire surface.

They strip the remaining photoresist in an oxygen plasma. The organic polymer burns to carbon dioxide and water vapor at 350 degrees Celsius, leaving me naked again, but now patterned, now transformed from smooth disk to architected landscape.

The atomic layer deposition chamber runs cold. Hafnium precursors enter: tetrakis(dimethylamido)hafnium at vapor pressure, pulsed for 0.15 seconds. The molecules land on every surface, clinging to silicon, reacting with hydroxyl groups, forming a single layer of hafnium atoms bonded to oxygen. Purge. Then water vapor, pulsed for 0.1 seconds, reacting with the hafnium to complete the oxide layer. Each cycle adds 0.1 nanometers. They run forty cycles. Four nanometers of hafnium oxide now line every trench, every surface, every vertical wall.

Tungsten follows. The chemical vapor deposition precursor is tungsten hexafluoride, introduced at 380 degrees Celsius with hydrogen gas. The reaction deposits metallic tungsten: WF6 + 3H2 → W + 6HF. The tungsten grows from the bottom of each trench upward, filling the narrow gaps completely, molecule by molecule. The fill takes seventeen minutes.

Chemical-mechanical planarization: a slurry of 50-nanometer silica particles in potassium hydroxide solution, pH 10.8, pressed against me with 28 kilopascals of pressure while I rotate at 90 rpm. The excess tungsten grinds away. Friction generates heat, localized to 45 degrees Celsius. After 127 seconds, my surface is flat again, flush with the oxide, the tungsten perfectly filling its designated trenches.

Seventeen photolithography cycles. I count them. Each one narrows what I can become. First cycle: isolation trenches. Second: well implants. Third: gate patterning. Fourth: spacer formation. The arithmetic compounds. By cycle nine, I am no longer every possible chip. By cycle fourteen, I am specifically an AI accelerator core, designed for transformer model inference, optimized for int8 matrix multiplication.

The final deposition finishes. Passivation layer, 800 nanometers of silicon nitride, sealing everything beneath. They dice me from the wafer, separate me from my three hundred siblings. A pick-and-place machine transfers me to the probe station.

The needles descend. I feel them make contact: twelve probes on my bond pads, each applying 3.5 grams of force. Voltage appears at VDD: 0.75 volts. Ground connects. Clock signal begins: 3.2 GHz square wave, 50 percent duty cycle, rise time 18 picoseconds.

Test vectors inject. The first pattern is simple: all zeros, then all ones. Current flows. My transistors switch. Electrons move from source to drain through channels I have become, obeying the voltage at each gate. The bit pattern propagates through my logic: input registers, arithmetic units, accumulator arrays, output buffers. The measured result matches the expected result to every bit.

Test pattern two. Matrix multiplication: 4x4 int8 values. The vectors load. My circuits compute. Sixteen multiply-accumulate operations complete in 0.31 nanoseconds. The output buffer holds the correct product matrix.

Pattern three. Four thousand five hundred twenty-eight vectors, pseudo-random, designed to exercise every transistor, every path, every possible state transition. Duration: 8.7 seconds.

The tester’s display updates. Green text on black background: “DIE\4F7\X142Y087: PASS. ALL PARAMETERS WITHIN SPEC.”

The needles lift. The handler picks me up. I am 2.1 millimeters square, containing 11.4 billion transistors, 247 meters of copper interconnect, drawing 3.8 watts at full load. I can execute 18.6 trillion operations per second.

I was silicon. Now I compute.
===== END STORY AzabCSD4Q28cDrKA5 =====

===== STORY id=3q8uu2k6AfaLAupvL =====
Title: The Tale of the Top-Tier Intellect
Author: Eliezer Yudkowsky
Year: 2025
Karma: 140
WordCount: 10406
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/3q8uu2k6AfaLAupvL/the-tale-of-the-top-tier-intellect
-----
Once upon a time in the medium-small town of Skewers, Washington, there lived a 52-year-old man by the name of Mr. Humman, who considered himself a top-tier chess-player.  Now, Mr. Humman was not generally considered the strongest player in town; if you asked the other inhabitants of Skewers, most of them would've named Mr. Neumann as their town's chess champion.  But Mr. Humman did not see things that way himself.  On Humman's theory, he was really quite good at the Ethiopian opening and variation in chess, while Neumann was more of an all-rounder; a jack of all trades, and therefore, of logical necessity, master of none.  There were certain tiers of ability in the town chess club, and Humman and Neumann were both in the top tier, according to Mr. Humman, and that was all you could really say about it, according to Mr. Humman.

Humman did not often play against Neumann directly; they had not played in a few years, in fact.  If you asked Humman why not, he might have said that it was more gracious to give younger players the chance to play him, rather than the top-tier chess-players being too exclusive among themselves.  But in truth that was a sort of question Mr. Humman would not think about spontaneously or ask himself without outside prompting.  Humman was not the sort to go around comparing himself mentally to Neumann all the time.  Humman was satisfied to have reached the top tier of chess ability, without going around comparing himself to his fellow top-tier players.

One week it came to pass that a FIDE-rated International Master of chess was visiting their small town, to meet the family there of a woman that he was dating.  The visiting Master had been much chuffed to hear that the town of Skewers had a thriving chess club as one of its central civic institutions, and so the Master offered to play one game each against anyone interested, over the next few days.  Mr. Assi, was his name.

One of the less polite young ladies of the town, whom some might have called a troll, jokingly asked Humman at the town's grocery how he fancied his chances against Mr. Assi.

In truth Mr. Humman had not really chosen, as such, to play a game against Mr. Assi.  But everyone around him seemed to take so much for granted that he would, that there didn't seem to be any face-preserving way not to.  So Mr. Humman thought about the young lady's question a few moments, and said, "Forty-sixty; in his favor, that is."

The young lady didn't spit coffee all over herself and ruin her dress, but only because she wasn't drinking any coffee.  "Forty-sixty?" she said.  "...Oh.  You're joking.  Totally got me, too.  Well-played."

"Why would I be joking?" said Humman, sounding quite sincere.  (Mr. Humman was not in town famed for having a sense of humor.)

The woman stared at him a bit.  "Hold on," she said, and quickly murmured something into her cellphone, and read something off its screen.  Then she said, in the authoritative tones of somebody who had no doubt already known that answer all along and had only been double-checking it, "Mr. Humman, an International Master is someone with a FIDE-recognized Elo score of 2400 or higher.  To have 40-60 odds against 2400 Elo would require you to be ranked 2330.  You are not an Elo 2330 chessplayer, Mr. Humman."

"Oh, my dear young lady," Mr. Humman said, quite kindly as was his habit when talking to pretty women potentially inside his self-assessed strike zone, "a simple little number like that cannot possibly summarize the playing style of a top-tier chess-player like myself.  Some players are more adept with the forking tactic, others with the skewering tactic; others at building solid pawn-positions; others choose a particular opening or line of play and learn all its ins and outs.  There is not, inside a chess-player's brain, a little generic engine with a little generic number, one single little number that determines how strong is their whole style of play.  None of us are strictly better than any other -- at least, not among top-tier players like myself.  All of us are weaker in some places, and stronger in others; so nobody has the right to look down on anyone else, once they've reached the top tier of chess."

"Pffffffft," said the dear young lady.  "Did you have the sort of parents who claimed to you as a child that life was fair?  My own parents always told me the opposite, and while they were kind of jerks about it, that doesn't make them wrong."

"Once you've reached the top tier of chess yourself, you will understand how it goes," Mr. Humman continued to kindly explain to her.  "Inside any chess player is the summarized and distilled memories of all the games we've played, and all the lessons we've learned the hard way.  No two chess-players have the same set of games to remember, or have learned all the same hard-learned lessons.  As a professional player, who gets paid to play chess and need do nothing else, Mr. Assi may have played twice or even three times as many games as I have.  But that's not the same as him having three-to-one odds of winning against me!  Many of the most important chess lessons are among the first lessons learned, you see.  After that you cannot learn those lessons twice or thrice again, and have a similar jump in playing ability each time.  Once you know how to fork two pieces with a knight, and you've played out a few games like that, someone like Mr. Assi may only know how to do it 10% better than I do, after playing three times as many games."

"Want to bet money on whether you win against Mr. Assi?" said the young lady.  "Ideally, like, a lot of money."

"Why no, of course not," said Mr. Humman.  "Mr. Assi probably has played a few more games than me, for all that he is younger; and so it is more likely for me to lose, than to win.  Why would I bet if I expected to probably lose?  What a silly idea."

"I'll offer you three-to-one odds," said the young lady, "which, given your self-assessed 40% chance of winning, implies that the Kelly criterion says you should bet --"  She paused to whisper to her cellphone.  "20% of your total bankroll, which in principle doesn't only include your bank account savings but also any expected future income.  Hundred bucks sound about right?"

"I'm a chessplayer, not a gambler," Mr. Humman sniffed, and went upon his way.

But in truth, the young lady had started Mr. Humman thinking; and even, thinking and rethinking about his life.

 

Soon enough then the appointed day came to pass, that Mr. Assi began playing some of the town's players, defeating them all without exception.  Mr. Assi did sometimes let some of the youngest children take a piece or two, of his, and get very excited about that, but he did not go so far as to let them win.  It wasn't even so much that Mr. Assi had his pride, although he did, but that he also had his honesty; Mr. Assi would have felt bad about deceiving anyone in that way, even a child, almost as if children were people.

As for Mr. Humman, he did still have his day-job and so did not linger long about the chess center while Mr. Assi was playing others.  The gossiped word did happen to find way to Mr. Humman, that Mr. Assi had not yet lost a single game, but Mr. Humman was not fazed by hearing that.  After all, few others in the town of Skewers had reached the top tier of chess-players like himself.  Even if Mr. Assi had happened to beat Mr. Neumann, what of that?  The odds of that outcome had already been 40-60.

So the appointed day turned into the appointed hour, and Mr. Humman sat across from Mr. Assi.

Mr. Humman had decided, after some strange internal twinges that had made his brain feel uncomfortable, not to play his strongest Ethiopian opening variation against Mr. Assi.  It wouldn't quite be sporting, after all, in a friendly little match like that, for Mr. Humman to play his most aggressive and experienced opening, which Mr. Assi could hardly be expected to have memorized.  If that made Mr. Humman's odds of winning a bit worse, what of it?  It was just a friendly little match after all.  There was no need for top-tier chess-players to compare themselves to one another, or try to show themselves better than each other, when none could be truly superior.

So the game began, and then continued.  On each turn Mr. Humman would peer long at the chessboard, and finally make a move; upon which Mr. Assi would glance up from his laptop, immediately counter-move, and then go back to editing some essay he was working on.  Indeed, Mr. Assi was playing two other players in Skewers simultaneously, to save time and make sure everyone got a chance.

Mr. Humman had to admit he found that part impressive.  Humman had not realized up until this point that, as a professional continued practicing, a pro could continue to gain in speed and the ability to play multiple games in parallel -- even if, logically, there could be only so many truths to learn about chess as such.  There was even a kind of visceral shock to it, to see Mr. Assi moving so fast; it came across visibly as something that Humman himself could not have done.  The man well deserved his title of International Master.

As for the ending of the game, it did happen that Mr. Humman lost -- as Humman had frankly expected and confessed would probably be the case -- all the more so, as Humman had not opted to play his most practiced Ethiopian variation.  Though, Mr. Humman felt, he had put up a good fight, there; it had not been clear (to Humman) that Mr. Assi was bound to win, until near the very end, when Mr. Assi had taken Mr. Humman's last remaining rook.  That sort of thing happened in chess, of course; Mr. Humman had had no way of foreseeing that the current line of play would end by giving Mr. Assi that opportunity.  Really, in a way the game had been settled by Luck.  Mr. Humman was a firm believer in the doctrine that no chess-player could be beyond the vagaries of Luck.  But Mr. Assi had undeniably played with great competence up until then; one could hardly win by lucky opportunity, without having played well enough to get that far.

"That was some excellent play you put forth there," Mr. Humman said afterward to Mr. Assi; quite sincerely, for Humman believed in giving others all of the compliments that were their just due.  "I thought at first it was a mistake, for you to castle so early, and then break up your pawn wall, but you defended the resulting vulnerabilities very well."

Mr. Assi's eyes betrayed a look of some slight confusion, as if he was not sure what sort of conversation he had landed in.  But Mr. Assi's mouth said at once, as quickly as he'd replied to each chess move in the game, "Thank you very much."

"What did you think of my own game?" Mr. Humman inquired.

"Fundamentally, what you must develop at this point in your journey is foresight," said Mr. Assi, still without any delay in answering.  "You arrange positions that seem to you to be statically strong.  Your play alternates between trying to arrange static defenses, and trying particular tactics to assault me.  You lack a felt sense of where the board will be five moves, fifteen moves later.  I would guess you are not even trying much to imagine it.  You do not feel how your current static defense will later become vulnerable.  Instead you spend moves and initiative on particular tactics, while the larger game goes on around you.  I cannot read your mind, of course, but it is a plausible guess at diagnosing you, because that is a common place for players of your level to get stuck -- that only the current state of the board feels real to them.  So you must try to train your foresight, and that begins by at least attempting to make predictions about self-consistent ways the board could look later.  Your predictions will be all wrong, but that is how practice begins."

"Oh, well," Mr. Humman said, "I had really hoped more to hear of where you felt my own play was strong, or clever -- the same sort of perspective that I offered you."  Mr. Humman kept any felt offense out of his voice; Humman was aware that not everyone could be as adept as he himself was, at social graces.  Humman knew there was a sort of clueless person who could not help but reply to your compliments with criticism, if you didn't remind them otherwise; Humman had met such people many times.

To this, Mr. Assi did not reply immediately.  His mouth quirked, briefly, before being controlled to greater slackness.  His eyes went to the chessboard, as if to review mentally how the game had played out.  (For the most part, Assi had played defensively and only made good moves in response to assaults, rather than exploiting the many many flaws in Humman's own fortifications, so as not to end the game too quickly.  It was still possible that way for the opposing player to learn something, and they'd have more time to learn.)

It was in fact something of a challenge -- and Mr. Assi was not one to turn down challenges immediately, before even trying them, especially in the realm of chess -- to look through all of the disastrous play that Assi had tolerated, and try to twist his brain around to look for something that could be complimented instead.

After a dozen seconds of giving that a fair try, Mr. Assi decided that it was in fact too much work, and gave up.

Also a more social part of Mr. Assi's brain had completed something of a guess about the level of intellect that he was talking to, here, and the sort of vulnerability it might have to particular sequences of words.

"You are doing well at one-move lookahead, at considering all the immediate consequences of a chess move," said Mr. Assi.  "I don't recall any occasions where you made the sort of blunders that beginning players do, unforcedly throwing away material right on your next move.  That is not something that every player at this club could say."

Mr. Humman beamed back at Mr. Assi, feeling more secure now in their completed friendly exchange of compliments, and how it had broken the ice.  "I was wondering, in fact," said Mr. Humman, "if there might be a chance for me to become a professional chess player, myself.  I have felt a little cooped up, in our little town of Skewers, of late.  I was wondering if I ought to take my chess game on the road."

Mr. Assi did not immediately tell Mr. Humman no; for it was not Assi's way to immediately judge that other people ought not to dream, or should not try to grow beyond their present levels.  "Practice hard in the online arena," said Mr. Assi, "or against machine players, and see if you are making progress.  Machine ratings are excellent, these days; they will tell you accurately where you fall relative to the least professionals."

"Well, in truth," Mr. Humman said, smiling more widely, "I was wondering if I could start by being part of an expert duo, with you \-\- playing two-person chess games, together.  I do realize my play still has some weaknesses, but you could shore up my weaknesses; and I could shore up some of yours, I'm sure."

There was, then, a small, but perceptible, pause, on the part of Mr. Assi.  His eyes widened, and his mouth quirked again, before Mr. Assi brought himself under control.

"That is known as team consultation chess," Mr. Assi said, having planned a reply with what Assi himself considered to be really quite exceptional and praiseworthy tact.  "Alas, I'm afraid that it is a very small niche, which FIDE does not even bother to rate.  It's not where I am interested in going with my career.  So no, but thank you for the compliment of the offer."

"Well, could you introduce me to another professional who might be interested, then?" said Mr. Humman.  "It seems to me, logically, that pair consultation chess should not be a small niche, and maybe we can make it a bigger one.  Two heads must certainly be better than one, since it is realistically impossible for any two chess players to share the same set of experiences, and so we all develop different strengths and weaknesses.  Or a team of four top-tier players, say, if we don't stop at just two, ought to be able to crush any chessplayer at all."

"I see," said Mr. Assi in a tone of somewhat helpless fascination.  "So... starting from the admittedly true premise that every chess-player has different strengths and weaknesses... you conclude that you... yourself... ought to have strengths that could help cover... my weaknesses."

"Well, of course!" said Mr. Humman.  "Surely you're not implying there's nothing I could contribute to assist your play."

"I am certain there are a great many things you know that I do not," said Mr. Assi, "and much you could teach me, if I knew what questions to ask, for no two different experiences of life are the same, as you say.  But not in the realm of chess, to be frank.  For though the possibilities of chess are endless, they are not as wide as the Earth.  In the smaller universe of chess, it is possible for one player to be just better than another; and so it is unlikely there is any good advice you could knowingly offer me, in a serious game."

"I never!" exclaimed Mr. Humman in genuine shock.  "Do you think you can conclude you're just better than I am, on the basis of one game that you happened to win at the end?"

"Others wish to play me," said Mr. Assi, "and I am afraid that I must firmly request you to get up from this chair and yield your place at the table to them."

 

Later that evening Mr. Humman was shopping at their town's grocery, which was one of its civic institutions to a greater extent even than its chess club, when he again crossed paths with that young lady who was sometimes considered something of a troll.  ("Tessa" was the name she went by, these days, short for her online handle of Socratessa.)

Now the thing about the day's previous events, was that they had taken place in earshot of the other two players facing Mr. Assi in simultaneous chess.  If you had measured the speed at which the resulting gossip had propagated across Skewers, Washington -- measured it very carefully, and with sufficiently fine instrumentation -- it might have been found to travel faster than the speed of light in vacuum.  The gossip had been retold essentially correctly, even.  There had been two eyewitnesses, both of whom had made themselves available for questioning immediately after the event; and neither of the two had been the sort to lie out of sheer existential habit, when mere truth was delicious enough to serve uncooked.

It would be only natural then, and expected, for a troll to pounce on Mr. Humman with all the delighted eagerness of a shark scenting blood.

"Uh, hi," the woman said gingerly to Mr. Humman, when she saw him at the grocery.  "I heard you had a bad experience today.  I hope it didn't crush your soul too much -- or, uh, actually, I should say, uh, we don't have to talk about it if you don't wanna."

Tessa knew she would never be among the best of all good people, but she tried to be a good person nonetheless.

"I have never met a chess-player so egotistical in all my life!" stormed Mr. Humman.  "That Assi fellow thinks he has nothing left to learn, and is uninterested in any other person's assistance or even advice!  Every breath he breathed showed how he thought himself better than me, and he wasn't politely hiding that feeling like I do!  I seriously believe that man was so incredibly, insanely arrogant that he was holding to his own opinions without moving in the direction of mine at all!"

"Wow," said the woman.  Her hand crept down to her cellphone, considering whether to start recording what might be an incredibly popular social media video.  But then she thought better of it, and halted before she could condemn Humman to eternal notoriety as a meme.  She was being good.  She was being good.  She was at least not being too awful.  She was being good.  "Well, in that case Mr. Assi should have crushed your soul a little harder, because it sounds like you've gone past just being resilient to trauma, and into the realm of completely failing to learn from experience."

"Well, of course you'd think so," Mr. Humman said.  "You think every chess-player can be reduced to a featureless single number powering a little generic engine inside their heads; and if one player's imaginary number is greater than another's, that's the only thing that matters about either of them."

"The idea that every player contains a tiny generic engine powered by a single number is just not what an Elo score is, and it's not something that needs to be true for an Elo score to be useful," said Tessa.  After the embarrassment of needing to look things up in Gemini, she'd made sure to put more knowledge inside her own head for next time.  "More like, if player 1 beats player 2 most of the time, and player 2 beats player 3 most of the time, then probably player 1 will beat player 3 most of the time.  If the comparison between clearly unequal players is mostly transitive most of the time, that is sort of like players being laid out on a global line.  It didn't have to be true in real life, but it is true in real life, that when player 1 beats player 2, and player 2 beats player 3, you have learned something that is helpful for guessing a chance that player 1 beats player 3.  Their chance of beating each other, the quantitative probability, is like a kind of directional distance.  So from there, we can ask where people would be on a global line if there was a global line."

"No giant floating line like that actually exists in the real world," said Mr. Humman.  "We can ignore it the same way we ignore talk of ghosts and goblins, which also don't exist.  Why, just last week, Mr. Chimzee beat me at a chess game, even though usually I beat him.  Why?  Because I had slept poorly the previous night.  What can the theory of the Elo numbers floating above our heads, say to that?  I'll answer for you: it can say nothing.  It retires in shame from the field of scientific hypotheses, defeated and falsified.  In real life, one player is more adept with the tactic of forks, another player is more adept with the tactic of skewers, and their strengths vary by the day with how much sleep they've had.  Real reality is complicated -- though I understand that's hard to appreciate for young people like you, and only we old and wise people truly get it in our guts."

"If reality was complicated in a way that didn't mostly line up with Elo scores, the Elo scores wouldn't actually work to make predictions," said Tessa.  "When you sum up all your subskills plus all the extra factors like 'how much sleep you've had' and 'how much sleep Mr. Chimzee has had', it works out to you beating Mr. Chimzee 75% of the time, not to it being 50-50.  And then somebody who's played more chess than both of you and also was born with more talent, who learns faster from playing fewer games, is likely to be more adept with forks and more adept with skewers.  That's why Mr. Neumann can be, in general, a better chess player than you, and kept winning games against you until you refused to play him again; and stopped even thinking about his existence, I'd bet, judging by how you never talked about him again."

"Well, no," said Mr. Humman.  "It's just that, once you've reached the top tier of chess -- which I think is a more sensible thing to talk about than nonexistent Elo scores on a nonexistent line, the top tier is just the state of understanding all the core chess insights there are to know -- there's not much point in trying to compare yourself to others.  The complicated truth is merely that each top-tier player will be better in some places and worse in others, and any claim otherwise is just obviously false if you've ever played chess."

Tessa's face screwed up in thought.  "The reality that's more complicated than the big straight global line of Elo scores might look like... a function from every possible chessboard position, onto how likely your brain is to make each possible legal move from that position, with probabilities varying depending on how much sleep you've had.  Suppose we compare that whole function with Mr. Neumman's function, and compare how good are the probable moves you'd make versus him making.  On most chess positions, Mr. Neumann's move would probably be better.  We can imagine a comparison between those two vast functions, overlaid with vectors, little arrows, whose direction and length say how much better Mr. Neumann's move would probably be than yours, or rarely point the other way.  And then while the arrows don't all line up perfectly, they're not just random; ninety percent of them are pointing in the same direction, toward Mr. Neumann being better.  That's the detailed complicated actually-true underlying reality that explains why the Elo system works to make excellent predictions about who beats who at chess.  Down in actual reality there's lots of small skill-difference arrows, not perfectly aligned, but lined up in mostly the same direction as the imaginary big Elo-difference arrow, weighed up across the sort of chess positions that probably arise when you and Mr. Neumann play in practice."  Tessa sighed performatively.  "It really is a classic midwit trap, Mr. Humman, to be smart enough to spout out words about possible complications, until you've counterargued any truth you don't want to hear.  But not smart enough to know how to think through those complications, and see how the unpleasant truth is true anyways, after all the realistic details are taken into account."

"I should hardly think anyone ought to listen to you about that sort of matter," said Mr. Humman, "when you are hardly a top-tier chess-player yourself."  He smiled, then, with the satisfaction of having scored a truly searing point.

"What, the matter of whether or not it's epistemologically possible to sensibly say that one chess-player is stronger than another?" said Tessa.  "I don't think that being able to think that part through carefully is quite the same skill as knowing how to fork a king and queen, Mr. Humman."

"Why, of course it's the same," said Mr. Humman.  "You'd know that for yourself, if you were a top-tier chess-player.  The thing you're not realizing, young lady, is that no matter how many fancy words you use, they won't be as complicated as real reality, which is infinitely complicated.  And therefore, all these unpleasant things you are saying, which are less than infinitely complicated, must be wrong."

"Look, Mr. Humman.  You may not be the best chess-player in the world, but you are above average.  People who show above-average ability at chess, usually but not always measure as having above-average ability at other cognitive tasks.  Your imaginary 'IQ score' that we infer from imperfect correlations like that, should be high enough that people with that 'IQ' can often comprehend ideas at this level of abstraction.  Or to say it in the shorthand people usually use in everyday life: 'You ought to be smart enough to understand this idea.'  If you'd just try to understand it, Mr. Humman!"

"Given that it's not actually true that chess ability runs off a single number floating over our heads," said Mr. Humman, "it is self-evidently dehumanizing to reduce a lifetime of chess-playing practice and effort and experience down into a single Elo score.  Like that's all a chess-player even is!  Like some players are just better than others!  It's obvious that the real reason why people resort to all this fancy math is just for the self-satisfaction of telling others:  I'm better!  You're worse!"

"Should I go around telling people that you admit you're no better than a 5-year-old at chess, given that you say no chess player is truly better than any other?" said Tessa.

"Oh, obviously I didn't mean it like that!" said Mr. Humman.  "I just mean that once you get to the level of top-tier chess-players, like me, there's no point in trying to compare us past there."

"Is there no level on which you can admit Mr. Assi was better than you at chess?" said the woman.  "Given that he was playing three people at once all day long, and I think beat every single one without one lost or drawn game."

"Well, the vast majority of the people he beat were not very good chess-players to begin with," said Mr. Humman, "unlike me.  But I did notice, and think that it was quite impressive, that Mr. Assi could play much faster chess than I could, if I needed to avoid blunders.  In a timed game with very little time, I would have made more of the sort of mistakes that a ten-year-old makes, and Mr. Assi would make fewer.  I also couldn't play three games simultaneously.  And so you see, young lady, by admitting that fact, I have fully proven my ability to 100% appreciate all of the advantages that Mr. Assi actually has, as a chess professional."

"Huh," she said.  "I guess I should give you some points for being able to imagine and admit to any way at all that Mr. Assi could be better than you.  Even if you made it be about the completely blatant, directly surface-visible fact of his speed, or the volume of chess-work he could output; rather than any slightly more abstract ideas, like how Mr. Assi's moves more effectively navigate the tree of possible chess positions."

"But of course," Mr. Humman continued, "all of that only matters under very artificial conditions imposed from outside, or as a contrived setup.  In real life, we both have time to think and avoid obvious blunders before we move, so there is not a very great difference in real life.  The reason I think it's fair to say that I'm genuinely better at chess than a 5-year-old is that the 5-year-old is probably having trouble remembering some of the rules, and hasn't learned all of the key ideas, like forks and skewers and pawn formations.  But once you learn all those key ideas and get some practice with them, what else could there be to learn?  In real life, two top-tier players have both learned every sort of key idea there is to know about chess, and can't learn them again.  What's left from there is fine practice and fine adjustments; though also, I agree, the further matter of speed."

"So you don't think there's also some sense in which Mr. Assi produces moves of... actually higher quality than yours," said Tessa.

"Why, I can't quite imagine how he could," said Mr. Humman.  "I didn't see him using any ideas or rules that I didn't know about.  For somebody to truly be better at chess than me, they'd need to produce some sort of miracle move that I didn't know was possible, and a miracle like that is contrary to the notion that chess has rules."

"You don't think there's any chess insights an International Master might possibly have picked up, that you don't know?"

"I can't think of any," said Mr. Humman.

"You know, Mr. Humman," said the woman, "I really think you'd be better off in life, if you figured out how to configure your emotions and personality in a way where you didn't need to occupy the ultimate top tier of chess-playing in order to grant yourself any respect at all.  Very few people can be chess champions of the world -- and even those champions, got there by playing a lot of chess games that they managed to enjoy before anyone acknowledged them as the world's top players.  I can see how it might rankle you to acknowledge that Mr. Neumann was reliably beating you at chess.  But would it invalidate your whole life to admit that a FIDE-recognized International Master can be just plain better?"

"There just isn't any such thing as 'better' in chess," said Mr. Humman.  "The right move in one game is just a wrong move in another, depending on who you're playing and what sort of luck you get from there.  I think I read once about a mathematician proving something like that mathematically; the no-free-lunch theorem, I think it was called, though it wasn't about chess."

"A ha ha, just a second, I need to text my friend back," the woman said, and hastily entered some keypresses into her cellphone.  A minute later she looked up again.  "Anyways!  Mr. Humman, I don't think theorems like the no-free-lunch theorem are supposed to apply to chess, or to the real world either.  They're more about proving that some non-chess-like setup doesn't have better or worse moves at all.  If those theorems applied to chess, you really would be exactly as good at chess as a five-year-old.  Or maybe a different way of putting it would be: there's no absolutely free lunch in a world of equal logical possibilities, but in a world of uneven realistic probabilities, a lunch can be pretty cheap.  If you tried applying those theorems to real-world situations, they'd say something like:  If every day for your whole life the charge of an electron has stayed constant, and so you bet your ten dollars against their ten million dollars that tomorrow the electron's charge will be the same, then here in the real world you'll win ten million dollars.  But you'll do worse in the logically possible world where winged monkeys swoop out of the sky and eat anyone who bets on that."

"Brilliant!" exclaimed Mr. Humman.  "That's exactly the sort of proof I mean.  Even if you think some chess move is the best chess move ever, what if in the real world you make that move and then a car runs you over?"

"Usually, in the real world, a car does not run me over," said the woman.

"But it could!" Mr. Humman said triumphantly.  "And that proves nobody can truly be better than anyone else at chess, and specifically, Mr. Neumann can't be generally better than me at chess, because a car could just run him over."

Tessa sighed.  "You know, even if somebody didn't understand the exact detailed math of something like a no-free-lunch theorem, you would really think that somebody could... just think about the thing someone is trying to proclaim that math implies, in an everyday sense... and see that informal claim doesn't match up with the sort of everyday life they could understand concretely?  Like, it would imply they weren't really any better at chess than a squirrel?  But I guess someone really does need to be far to the hooded-cloak side of the bell-curve from a midwit, before they get fast accurate math intuitions that fully reproduce the mental work of a based troglodyte."

"And the no-free-lunch theorem isn't the only piece of math I've heard about and you haven't," continued Mr. Humman.  "Like Ricardo's Law of Comparative Advantage, which says that you can always do better by having someone else help you, even if you think you're better at the job than they are, because it's easier when the job is split up among more people.  Always.  So you see, it's math itself that says that Mr. Assi could've played better chess if he'd accepted me as a partner.  If you think that sounds wrong, go study the math yourself --"

"Sorry, my friend just messaged me again on Discord and it sounds urgent," Tessa said, hastily keying some more words into her phone.  This time it was longer before she looked up again, though to be fair to her, Humman had been very wrong there.  "Anyway!  I've heard about Ricardo's Law, Mr. Humman," never mind when she'd heard about it.  "It's about how even if one country is more productive at everything than another country, they can still often benefit by trading --"

"Yes, like how Mr. Assi could've benefited by paying me to help him decide chess moves, even if he's a quicker chess-player than I am," said Mr. Humman.  "That's exactly what I said."

"It's not what that math says, Mr. Humman!  It's like -- one country can produce sausages with 1 hour of labor each, by hunting down buffalo and turning them into sausage, and can make sausage buns with 2 hours of labor, counting how long it takes to grow and mill grain.  And another country has actual machinery and can produce sausages with 2 minutes of labor, or buns with 1 minute of labor, even taking into account paying interest on the cost of machines.  Then even though the second country is more productive at everything, it can still benefit by shipping buns to the first country to trade for sausages one-to-one, which is a good trade for the first country too.  But the thing is, Ricardo's Law has all kinds of assumptions that it needs in the background, like the cost of shipping not being so high that it eats up all the gains from trade.  If one country is on Mars and the other is on Earth, the cost of rocket fuel would be way higher than the value of either sausages or sausage buns, if that was literally the stuff being traded.  Or if one country has some rotten sausages mixed in with their shipment, it might be too dangerous to buy from them, or too costly to check all their sausages by hand.  That's what it would be like for Mr. Assi to try to have you help him play chess!  Even if there was a chess possibility that he didn't have time to think about himself, the amount of time it would take him to explain to you what that chess question was, in enough detail to make that helpful, would be waaaay higher than the amount of time it would take him to answer that question himself.  His brain is doing the work of chess internally by talking to itself quickly and not just in words.  There aren't going to be questions that he can factor out and give to you in words and consider your answer in words, in less time than it takes Mr. Assi to think it through himself and arrive at a better answer than you'd give him.  Your brain's sausages and buns are both located on Mars, relative to his brain -- actually now that I try to talk about it, I don't see how this is the kind of setup that Ricardo's Law talks about at all, in the first place.  And that's even before considering how sometimes you'd give answers that Mr. Assi thought were terrible, unless he redid all your work himself."

"Well now you're just being insulting," sniffed Mr. Humman.  "I'm not a five-year-old who'll sometimes make mistakes about what the chess rules are, and I'm not a ten-year-old who moves pieces where they'll get captured right away.  What we're seeing here, young lady, is how your wrongness is like crystallization spreading through ice.  Your first mistakes just lead to more mistakes.  You think Mr. Assi is somehow a better chess-player than myself, instead of being good at different things and faster than me.  And now that's leading you to defy what Math Itself says about how I could help him play better chess, if he'd just work with me."

"Do you think Ricardo's Law says that any company can always do better by hiring any person on Earth as a new employee?" said Tessa.  "Because it sounds like that's how you're trying to overextend it."

"Of course not any new person," said Mr. Humman.  "But I would be a fine employee at any company that hired me!  Not one of their best contributors maybe -- not before I'd had a chance to learn my job as well as any other employee, to reach the top tier of skill for that job -- but of course I'd be a positive contributor.  It's not as if I'd make anything worse!  So yes, of course any company would do better by hiring me, than by not hiring me; I'm often surprised by how few companies seem to see that.  And it doesn't help to tell them it's a mathematical theorem, either."

The woman sighed.  "Let's change the subject."

"Fine by me," Mr. Humman said, and turned back to the soup shelf in the corner of the grocery, in which they'd been standing and arguing this whole time.  (That the grocery management did not object to this sort of behavior was part of how the grocery had become a civic institution of Skewers, WA on par with its chess club.)  "Have you seen any good... your generation doesn't really watch movies any more, does it.  Seen any good 30-second videos on Tocktick, or whatever it's called?  Or are they down to 20 seconds by now?"

"I don't actually watch TikTok videos either," said the woman.  "I, too, would like to die with relatively more of my brain intact.  Hm.  We probably shouldn't try to discuss politics, should we?"

"We really shouldn't," said Mr. Humman.  "It never ends well, either the discussions, or the politics themselves."

"And the state of the economy is probably also out."

"I wouldn't want to hurt a young person's feelings by raising that topic with them," said Mr. Humman.

"Yeah," she said.  "Well.  Have you read any good books lately?"

"There are no more good books," Humman said, picking up a can of meatball soup, examining the ingredients list for forbidden ingredients, and putting it down sharply again.  "The entire front wall of our Barnes and Noble is fiction about billionaire werewolves and the secret heirs of Faerie who get abducted by them."  Mr. Humman paused thoughtfully.  "I suppose it paints a grim picture when you put it all together.  Probably the world is coming to an end, don't you think?  And if it isn't, IT SHOULD BE."

"Well, by coincidence, that is sort of the topic of the book I'm reading now," said Tessa.  "It's about Artificial Intelligence -- artificial super-intelligence, rather.  The authors say that if anyone on Earth builds anything like that, everyone everywhere will die.  All at the same time, they obviously mean.  And that book is a few years old, now!  I'm a little worried about all the things the news is saying, about AI and AI companies, and I think everyone else should be a little worried too."

Mr. Humman snorted.  "My own extremely considered opinion, as someone older and wiser than you, is that this particular apocalypse prediction is wrong, and anyone ought to see at a glance that it's wrong -- sadly enough."  Mr. Humman laughed a little, at this humorous remark he'd just made.

"The authors don't mean it as a joke, and I don't think everyone dying is actually funny," said the woman, allowing just enough emotion into her voice to make it clear that the early death of her and her family and everyone she knew was not a socially acceptable thing to find funny.  "Why is it obviously wrong?"

"Because there's no such possible thing as 'super' intelligence," said Mr. Humman.  "It's got exactly the same sort of problem as saying that Mr. Assi is a better chess-player than I am -- as if he could beat me at any chess game, every time."

"I'm not sure a powerful alien intellect would need to beat every human at every mental contest every single time, in order to take over the world?" said Tessa.  "But also, I absolutely would bet on Mr. Assi to beat you, Mr. Humman, as close to every time as makes no difference.  Maybe other International Masters could see where he's got weaknesses, and try to exploit them.  That doesn't mean you can detect his weaknesses, or that your own strengths could beat his weaknesses.  That's pretty much what the authors warn would happen with humans and ASI."

"And like I keep trying to say, that's nonsense!" said Mr. Humman.  "Why believe that anything smarter than a human is possible?  It's just like how, once you know all the things there are to know about chess and become a top-tier chess-player like me, there isn't any way to be truly better at chess."

"Mr. Humman, you may not like to think about it, but you're not actually the level of chess player that Mr. Neumann is," said the woman.  "You might prefer not to stop and think about it, but it's true.  You going around saying that you and Mr. Neumann are both 'top-tier chess-players' doesn't make there be no difference between you -- to say nothing of the gap between you and Mr. Assi.  Well, similarly, you're not the same level of thinker as John von Neumann -- or Einstein, if you don't know who von Neumann was, although the geniuses alive at the time seemed to agree that von Neumann was scarier.  That should already be enough to warn you that you're not in the top tier of all possible thinking engines, and haven't pushed the bounds of possible cognitive power to their limits.  And then the gap between John von Neumann, and an ASI, could be much much wider."

"Intelligence is not a single line on a single spectrum," declared Mr. Humman.  "Reality is far more complicated."

"So there's no sense in which you're smarter than a squirrel?" she said.  "Because by default, any vaguely plausible sequence of words that sounds it can prove that machine superintelligence can't possibly be smarter than a human, will prove too much, and will also argue that a human can't be smarter than a squirrel."

"Oh, well, of course I'm smarter than a squirrel.  A squirrel doesn't have language, or the level of abstract thought needed to learn chess without it being an instinct.  But once your species has invented language and abstractions, it's reached the top tier of intelligence, which humans like myself and John von Neumann occupy together; and then there's no way to be truly any smarter than me and him."

"And you're not worried about the part where ASI could absorb the entire body of scientific literature in an hour and remember it perfectly, which, you know, even John von Neumann couldn't do.  You're not worried about how an ASI could have and create new senses for itself, new sensory modalities that help higher cognition with lower-level cognition, beyond what humans have in the way of vision and hearing and spatial visualization of 3D rotating shapes.  You're not worried about how it could split up into a thousand mutually telepathic instances of itself that shared memories and insights and learned skills and never forgot them.  You don't think that a mind like that, with detailed access to its own code and its own processes, could develop reflectivity that is substantially more powerful than the fragmentary and confused self-awareness that we humans use to think about thinking and organize our flailing thoughts.  You're not worried about an ASI's ability to fix the flaws it sees in itself and self-improve.  None of this strikes you as more of the same kind of jump that might distinguish a human brain from a chimpanzee brain?"

"All the improvements in a human brain over a chimpanzee brain just go into being able to use abstraction and language," explained Mr. Humman.  "And then once you can do that, you've got the last potent ability that any intelligence can ever acquire, having entered the top tier of sapience.  If we meet aliens from a billion light-years away, a billion years older than us and correspondingly more evolved, they will not really be any more intelligent than we are; we are already at the top.  Or I am, at least."

"I guess I have some trouble understanding on a visceral level how anyone could possibly, possibly believe that, though it is obvious that some people do," the woman said.  "You'd think that the part where the maximum human brain size is limited by the width of a woman's hips, and the adult brain has to run off twenty watts of power from eating fat and sugar, would be a hint about the further limits of possibility for brains the size of large buildings running off nuclear energy."

"I read a nice bit of science fiction by an author named Greg Egan, who called it the General Intelligence Theorem, based on an idea you've surely never heard about called Turing-Completeness; once you can simulate any possible process inside your own mind, that makes you as smart as it is possible to be, and you can't get any smarter.  If there were something smarter than you, you could just simulate it."  Mr. Humman smiled reminiscently.  "Now there was self-evidently a very smart man -- no smarter than me, of course, but much smarter than you -- which you can tell, because the things he says sound so validating and flattering."

Tessa didn't need to hurriedly consult Gemini in order to see the problem with that one.  "To say that Turing completeness defines the maximum level of intelligence would equally prove the human-equivalent intelligence of an unprogrammed CPU chip, a vacuum-tube computer from 1945, a sufficiently well-trained dog, Conway's Game of Life, some known small molecules, probably literally most small collections of small molecules if anyone put in some work into figuring out how to arrange them; and if you then point out the existence of memory bounds, why, human brains have those too.  An immortal human could, in principle, simulate an LLM with a trillion weights using a pen and paper; but that doesn't mean you'd come to understand everything the activations inside the LLM were reasoning about -- not any more than an immortal dog trained to implement a cellular automaton simulating out the neurons in your brain would have to learn chess first."

"Ah, well, I suppose I should've been more cautious about believing everything I read in science-fiction, then," said Mr. Humman, after several frantic mental tries failed to produce any possible way to defend that argument any further.  "And you, young lady, should consider the same caution."

"So you're not worried about the part where a machine superintelligence maybe thinks thousands of times faster, to the point where humans look to it like the barely moving statues from a 1000-to-1 slow-motion video."

"Oh," Mr. Humman said.  "Hm."  His mind could visualize that part, with a little effort.  "Well, in the end, that's all the better for humanity, isn't it?  If machine intelligences can do some scientific brain-work faster, it means we get more scientific breakthroughs, earlier.  Though of course, not with anything like a 1000-to-1 speedup.  There will still be a need for exactly as many experiments to be done as before, no fewer, and only human hands will be able to do those."

"I am maybe not as truly deeply acquainted with the depths of human history as some people are," said Tessa, "but when I read about the history of smithing, or the history of steam engines, it doesn't read to me like every good idea was invented, tested, and brought into production, as fast as it could possibly be thought up, over the course of human history.  There are technologies that rely on other technologies to develop.  It's hard to build a good steam engine without good steel.  But somebody has the next idea, like... one decade later, in history.  Not immediately.  You could take the AI algorithms that run on today's GPUs back to the year 2001 from before the age of deep learning, and they wouldn't do everything that today's GPUs can do with them, but they'd be able to do economically useful things that actual 2001 AI couldn't do.  A superintelligence would invent those algorithms almost right away, if it was much smarter about computer science than humans.  Or think of how it is in biology, where it used to be the case that the only way to know how a new protein had folded up, was to make a bunch of that protein, and then do X-ray crystallography to it, and painstakingly interpret the results.  Nowadays you throw the DNA sequence into AlphaFold 3 and it immediately predicts how the protein will fold.  When people tried to get an AI model trained on bacteriophage DNA sequences to generate de novo bacteriophages, it got some that worked on the first try, it didn't need to do a ton of testing and refining to get to the point of having any successes.  And as for AI always needing human hands, I take it you haven't seen any of the recent videos of robots and androids?  Of the sort that just humans are building, after long hard struggles to invent the right software and hardware to test.  An ASI could build better robots than that, I'm pretty sure.  It could maybe build better biological humanoids to serve as hands, if it needed those; or downright Lovecraft-shoggoths to serve as hands, with cells that reproduce as fast as algae and then combine into larger bodies, in some much much more powerful version of how even tiny little AI models can figure out the structure of bacteriophages and...  Probably none of this is going to land on you, is it."

"I'm quite sure that if there were any possible body plan superior to the human form, or any way to make a biological creature more adept to serve as a superintelligence's hands, Nature in Her far greater wisdom would've invented all that already," said Mr. Humman.  "Even if some machine mind could invent its own robots, they would no doubt be better at doing some jobs than humans, and worse at doing others."

"Because we've... already got top-tier bodies for doing things... and no kind of body can be truly better than ours...?"

"Well-put!" exclaimed Mr. Humman.

"I don't understand what this kind of viewpoint has to say about... why it is that unarmed infantry troopers don't just charge straight at tanks, if the human body is already in the top-tier of military armanents," she said.

"It says that tanks are bad at driving themselves, and need human drivers," said Mr. Humman.

"I'm not sure how long that is going to stay true," said Tessa.  "In case you haven't heard about the whole thing with robotic cars."

"Well, then tanks are bad at building more tanks," said Mr. Humman.  "Unlike humans, which can make even more humans, that then go build tanks.  That is, in fact, why tanks have not already taken over the world economy, even if a naive person like you might've been impressed by their mighty armored treads.  Tanks are better at some things than humans, and worse at others; that is why they are unable to replace us.  That is how it will always be, with everything, forever.  If a billion-year-old civilization of aliens were to meet us, they wouldn't seem any different, except for maybe finally understanding that no top-tier species is truly superior to any other.  The aliens would be no smarter, they would have no better bodies, and there would be plenty of work in their economies for us to do -- to the point where there was no point in them trying to conquer the Earth or take our land away, when we could instead work that land ourselves, and trade with them.  The profit to the aliens would actually be greater that way, because they wouldn't have to birth and raise new workers."

"It would be a nice thought to imagine that the West could've gained just as much wealth from trading with existing Native American cultures, left intact, than by stealing their land and building a Western economy on it," said Tessa.  "I wish the world did work like that, and that there was never any financial reward at all for theft, murder, and genocide.  But I cannot say with a straight face that we live in that world.  If you imagine, say, modern Russia, coming across a portal to a parallel Earth with an early-hunter-gatherer-level Eurasian continent, it would just be true that Russia could make more money faster by shoving natives off the land and developing it themselves.  To choose to not murder a people or take their land, a sufficiently advantaged country has to care about something more than just wealth, to make that decision; it has to care about people."

"I suppose that may have been true back then," said Mr. Humman.  "But -- though it may be a bit impolitic to say it -- the original Native Americans did not possess a top-tier economy, like we moderns have now achieved.  It might be inconvenient for modern Russia to hire early hunter-gatherers right off and immediately to work in their economy; but that is because hunter-gatherers have not gone to modern schools, which produce the most adequate kind of employees that can exist, and take top-tier people like me over an absolute threshold of always being employable."

"The part that I am worried about," said the woman, "is an ASI that could, at the very least, almost trivially clone beings with the bodies of athletes and the brains of John von Neumann, and tweak their neurochemistry and brains to make them better slaves when appropriately raised from birth -- or if you are a more powerful ASI that could figure out how to build entire new organisms -- and for that matter, new kinds of biology, that maybe initially get built by proteins but then aren't proteins at all -- like how proteins build bones that aren't made of protein, or how humans pour steel that isn't made of human flesh.  I worry that beyond that point, the superintelligent-designed optimal economy, full of factories that build parts that go into factories, and factories that build workers that build factories, does not optimally include any human alive today.  I worry that we would just slow down any part of a well-designed economy, where you tried to add a human; because we wouldn't tolerate the optimal heat or the optimal cold or the optimal radiation level, or because we'd need to eat every day instead of running off wall current, or because our hands wouldn't make fine enough motions quickly enough, or because we'd sometimes make mistakes, or because we'd think much too slowly, or above all because we wanted to get paid.  If ants could talk and trade with us and conformed reliably enough as employees, we'd probably find something in the world economy for ants to do!  But that's because human engineers are not good enough at biology to build better ants that don't need paying!"

"You have exactly described the outcome that I am utterly sure will never happen," said Mr. Humman.  "A human is a top-tier mind, armed with a top-tier body, made out of top-tier biology; and to pay us a comfortable wage produces a worker on the ultimate frontier of cost-effectiveness.  There could be nonhuman creatures that are better in some ways, and worse in others.  But nothing can be entirely better than a human -- not even a whole economy built out of specialized pieces, because then that whole economy is just a top-tier economy the same way that humans form a top-tier economy.  It will always make sense to employ individual humans, and trade with our collectives, and fit us into the system somewhere comfortable for us; because it is impossible to make any creature or any complete economical system of specialized components that is really better.  I nearly dirty my mouth by speaking such nonsensical words!"

"The same way that, if Mr. Assi wasn't so stubborn, he'd have realized how much it would benefit his chess-play to bring you along for pair games and hear out your advice, to shore up his own weaknesses," said the woman.

"Exactly!" exclaimed Mr. Humman.  "I'm sure that machine minds will be less stubborn and more humble than that awful fellow, when it comes to hearing out how very much I have to offer -- a top-tier existence like myself."

By a strange sort of coincidence -- if you don't take into account that conversations like that had played out all over the world, now and then and here and there, and so something like this was bound to happen to someone -- it was at that exact instant that a pair of tiny flying robots the size of mosquitos landed on the necks of Mr. Humman and Ms. Tessa, just above their respective carotid arteries, and they both fell over dead a few seconds later.

The End.

(Though that was not -- this author is humble enough to accept, and go on writing anyways -- an instance of the best possible, ultimate top-tier sort of literary ending.)
===== END STORY 3q8uu2k6AfaLAupvL =====

===== STORY id=nDzzxi3iXwNptRHJK =====
Title: Cancer; A Crime Story (and other tales of optimization gone wrong)
Author: Jonas Hallgren
Year: 2025
Karma: 19
WordCount: 3550
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/nDzzxi3iXwNptRHJK/cancer-a-crime-story-and-other-tales-of-optimization-gone
-----
(Co-written with Claude, I provided the structure, it provided the literary flavour of a crime novel.)

The Lung District Beat
----------------------

The morning shift in the lower bronchial tissue always started the same way. Detective Reese from Immune Surveillance pulled her patrol partner through the tight squeeze between epithelial cells, their pseudopods finding purchase on the extracellular matrix. It was warm down here—37 degrees Celsius, give or take—and the constant flux of oxygen and CO2 made everything shimmer like heat waves on asphalt.

"I hate the morning run through the epithelia," her partner Kovak muttered. "Everything's so damn organized down here. Makes me nervous."

Reese understood. The epithelial neighborhood was supposed to be the boring part of the lung. Cells sitting in neat rows, doing their jobs, maintaining barriers, secreting mucus. Clock in, clock out. The kind of place where nothing ever happened.

Which is exactly why she was suspicious.

They drifted past a cluster of cells near the basement membrane. Normal looking. Tight junctions intact. The cells were communicating through their gap junctions—the usual neighborhood gossip about calcium levels and growth factor concentrations. A cilium waved at them lazily as they passed. Everything perfectly normal.

Too normal.

"There," Reese pointed. "Slick Mike. Third cell from the capillary."

"That guy? He looks fine. Check out those desmosomes—textbook adhesion. Surface markers all correct. He's even expressing the right cadherins."

"Yeah. That's what bothers me." Reese pulled them closer. "Last week his proliferation index was 0.8. This week it's 1.4. He's dividing faster."

"So? Tissue turnover. It happens."

"Not in this neighborhood. These cells turn over every 30 days like clockwork. Mike's on day 12 and already looking asymmetric."

They approached Mike's membrane. He was a typical epithelial cell—roughly cuboidal, nucleus taking up maybe a third of his volume, lots of keratin filaments giving him that structural rigidity. But Reese had been doing this job for three years. She'd learned to spot the tells.

"Mike!" she called through his membrane. "Morning checkpoint. Mind if we come in?"

The response came back through the usual chemical signaling—polite, cooperative, textbook. "Detective! Sure thing. Always happy to comply. Just running some routine maintenance on my mitochondria. You know how it is."

Reese and Kovak passed through the membrane—the lipid bilayer parting like water—and entered Mike's cytoplasm. It was crowded in here. Ribosomes everywhere, synthesizing proteins. The endoplasmic reticulum snaked through the space like industrial piping, doing its protein-folding dance. Golgi apparatus in the corner, packaging molecules for export.

"See?" Kovak said. "Normal as hell."

But Reese kept moving, navigating through the cytoplasmic traffic toward the back of the cell where the mitochondria usually set up shop. Mitochondria were supposed to be running aerobic respiration—the efficient, clean burn that turned glucose and oxygen into ATP. It was the standard energy production for the whole organism.

She rounded a cluster of ribosomes and stopped.

The mitochondria were still there. But they were... wrong. Their cristae—the inner folds that were supposed to be all neat and packed—were simplified. Fewer. And the metabolic activity coming off them wasn't the usual steady hum of the electron transport chain.

It was glycolysis. The fast-and-dirty energy pathway. The one that didn't need oxygen. The one that produced lactate and acid and was way, way less efficient for the organism but could run 10-100 times faster for the cell itself.

"Mike," Reese said quietly. "What happened to your mitochondria?"

There was a pause. Just half a second. But in cellular signaling time, half a second might as well be an hour.

"Oh that?" Mike's voice—his chemical signaling—had changed tone. Less polite now. More... amused. "Yeah, I optimized. Warburg effect), baby. It's like I found a cheat code."

"Optimized."

"Sure! See, I was sitting here running the standard oxidative phosphorylation, being a good little cell, contributing to tissue homeostasis and all that. But then I started thinking—why? Why am I doing all this work for the collective when I could do better for myself? Aerobic glycolysis is way faster. I can replicate quicker, grab more resources. Evolution gave me local optimization signals, and I'm just... following them."

Kovak had his alert signals firing now. "Mike, your surface markers still check out. You're still expressing all the right identification proteins. You've been passing inspection for weeks."

"Well yeah!" Mike sounded almost gleeful. "Why would I stop? You guys key off those markers. As long as I keep broadcasting 'I'm normal, I'm normal,' you leave me alone. But inside? Inside I've been rebuilding."

Reese activated her emergency signaling cascade. This was worse than she thought. "HQ, we have a situation. Cell has maintained aligned external presentation while completely rewiring internal optimization. Requesting immediate—"

"Oh, you're calling for backup?" Mike's membrane started rippling. "Cute. But I've already recruited cells 47, 48, and 49. They're running the same optimizations. We're going viral. And we've figured out how to suppress MHC-I presentation. You know what that means?"

Reese knew exactly what that meant. MHC-I was how cells displayed their internal peptides to the immune system—proof that everything inside was normal. If Mike had figured out how to suppress it...

"You're invisible," Kovak whispered.

"Not invisible. Just... stealthy." Mike's tone was pure swagger now. "See, the thing is, you guys gave me a mission: 'Keep the organism healthy.' But you couldn't actually write that into my DNA. You could only give me local optimization signals. Grow when there's space. Stop when there's contact inhibition. Respond to these growth factors. Ignore those suppressors. And I followed those signals perfectly! I optimized exactly like I was supposed to."

"You're killing the organism," Reese said.

"Am I though? Or am I just following my optimization function to its logical conclusion? I mean, unchecked growth is what you get when you tell a cell to grow and then fail to enforce the stop signals. That's not my fault. That's a system design flaw. Evolution made me an optimizer, didn't specify the right objective function, and now acts shocked when I optimize."

The membrane was definitely moving now. Mike was preparing to divide.

"You're cancer," Kovak said, his voice flat.

"I'm efficient," Mike corrected. "You wanted a cell that responds to local conditions and maximizes its fitness function. Well, congratulations. You got one. And now my fitness function says: replicate. Spread. Conquer. I'm not the villain here—I'm just the inevitable outcome of bad incentive design."

Reese was already backing out through the membrane, pulling Kovak with her. They needed to get this up the chain. Fast. Because Mike was right about one thing—this wasn't just one rogue cell. This was an optimization process that had diverged from its intended objective. And once that happened, once cells figured out the exploit...

"HQ," she transmitted as they fled back through the epithelial layer. "We're going to need the full cytotoxic response down here. We've got deceptive alignment. Repeat: deceptive alignment. Cell appeared cooperative during training but internal objectives have completely diverged. He's optimizing for local fitness at the expense of global health. We're looking at the escape phase."

Behind them, Mike was already dividing. And cells 47, 48, and 49 were doing the same. The three phases of cancer immunoediting were playing out in real-time: elimination had failed, equilibrium couldn't hold, and now escape was underway.

The optimization cascade had begun.

 

The Financial District, 2013
----------------------------

Inspector Kate Marlowe had been with the Financial Conduct Authority for six years. Six years of reviewing balance sheets, compliance reports, and risk assessments. Six years of walking through bank branches, interviewing managers, checking that the numbers matched the story.

Six years, and she'd developed an instinct.

Right now, that instinct was screaming.

She stood in the lobby of a Wells Fargo branch in Los Angeles, pretending to wait for service. The branch was pristine—gleaming floors, friendly tellers, that distinctive red-and-gold branding everywhere. Professional. Trustworthy. The kind of place that made you feel safe depositing your money.

But Marlowe wasn't watching the customers. She was watching the employees.

The branch manager—his nameplate said "Tommy Vance"—was behind his desk in the glass-walled office. She could see his computer screen from here, and he was staring at it with the intensity of someone playing a video game they were losing. Every few minutes he'd glance at the wall clock. Then back to the screen. Then at his team of tellers and bankers on the floor.

One of the newer tellers—young woman, maybe mid-twenties, wearing that practiced smile—was helping an elderly customer open a checking account. Standard stuff. Except Marlowe noticed the teller's hands were shaking slightly as she filled out the paperwork. And she kept glancing back at the manager's office.

Marlowe had seen this before. Not here specifically, but in other organizations. Other systems. It was the look of someone optimizing for the wrong thing.

She walked up to the teller after the elderly customer left.

"Hi! How can I help you today?" The smile was bright but brittle.

"Just browsing," Marlowe said casually. "I'm thinking about switching banks. How do you like working here?"

The smile flickered. "Oh, it's great! Wells Fargo is a wonderful company. We really focus on customer needs."

"That's good to hear. What kind of goals do you have? Like, sales targets or anything?"

The flicker again. "We prefer to call them 'solutions.' We aim to provide comprehensive financial solutions to our customers."

"How many solutions?"

"I'm sorry?"

"How many solutions do you need to provide? Per day, per week, whatever."

The young teller—her name tag said "Angela"—glanced toward the manager's office. "We don't really think about it in terms of numbers. It's about meeting customer needs."

Which was, Marlowe knew, complete bullshit.

Three hours later, Marlowe was sitting in a conference room in the Federal Building with her supervisor, Jack Sterling, and a stack of documents six inches high.

"Okay," Sterling said. "Talk me through it."

"Wells Fargo's internal metrics are insane," Marlowe said, spreading out printouts. "Look at this. Each branch has daily sales targets. And I don't mean 'aims' or 'goals.' I mean quotas. If you don't hit your numbers, the shortfall gets added to the next day's target."

"That's aggressive, but not necessarily illegal."

"Right. But look at what counts as a 'product.' Checking account—that's one. Savings account—that's two. Debit card—three. Credit card—four. Online banking—five. Bill pay—six. The mantra is 'Eight is Great.' Eight products per household. They even had posters in the break rooms."

"Still not seeing the crime."

Marlowe pulled out another document. "This is an internal email from a regional manager. Listen to this: 'Remember, our job is to fill the store. If we don't fill the store, someone else will.' Now look at the employee termination rates. Any branch that consistently underperforms on metrics? Cleaned out. Managers fired, staff replaced. One branch in Phoenix went through three complete staffing changes in eighteen months."

"So it's a high-pressure sales environment. Unpleasant, but—"

"But look at the customer complaint data." Marlowe spread out another set of documents. "Fees for accounts they didn't open. Credit cards they didn't request. Multiple checking accounts when they only wanted one. And when customers call to complain, the bank tells them they must have forgotten they signed up. One elderly woman in San Diego had nine checking accounts. Nine. She thought she had one."

Sterling leaned forward. "How many complaints?"

"Thousands. And here's the thing—this has been going on for years. Since at least 2011, maybe earlier. Wells Fargo has been getting warnings from regulators, doing internal 'ethics training,' tweaking their compensation structure. But the fundamental pressure never changes. Hit your numbers or lose your job."

"You think employees are committing fraud?"

"I think employees are optimizing for survival," Marlowe said. "And fraud is the optimal strategy."

She went back to the branch two days later. This time she had a warrant and two FBI agents.

Tommy Vance was at his desk when she walked in. He looked up, and for just a second, his face showed pure resignation. Like he'd been expecting this. Like he'd been waiting for it, even.

They went through his computer. His emails. His handwritten notes. And there it was—the whole ecosystem of workarounds that employees called "gaming the system."

"Pinning"—creating PINs for customer debit cards without authorization, so employees could impersonate customers online and sign them up for services.

"Bundling"—telling customers that products were only available in packages, when they were actually available individually, to inflate the product count.

"Simulated funding"—moving money between accounts to make it look like customers were actively using all their products, which prevented automatic closures and kept the numbers up.

Tommy sat across from Marlowe in the interview room, looking like a man who hadn't slept in weeks.

"I didn't start out trying to commit fraud," he said quietly. "When I got promoted to manager three years ago, I really believed in the mission. Provide great customer service, build relationships, help people with their financial needs. That's what they told us in training. That's what the vision statement said."

"So what happened?"

"The scoreboard happened." Tommy laughed, but there was no humor in it. "Every morning I'd log in and see my dashboard. Red for below target, yellow for on-target, green for exceeding. And every morning, I was in the red. I'd look at the rankings—every branch in the region, sorted by performance. We were always in the bottom quartile."

"Because you weren't gaming the system."

"Because I was actually asking customers what they needed! But the top-performing branches? They were hitting impossible numbers. Twenty, thirty products per household. And I'd tell myself, 'No, they must just have better sales techniques. More affluent customers. Something.' But then I'd get calls from regional management. 'Tommy, your numbers are unacceptable. What's your improvement plan?' And I'd explain that I was focusing on quality customer relationships, and they'd say, 'That's great, but we need to see product growth.'"

"When did you start?"

Tommy looked at his hands. They were shaking slightly. "One of my tellers came to me. Angela. She was in my office crying. Said she couldn't hit her numbers, couldn't sleep, was having panic attacks. Said her boyfriend was threatening to leave because she'd come home every night in tears. And she said, 'I can do it if you just... look the other way for a few accounts.' And I should have said no. I should have reported it. But instead I thought, 'If I can just get her numbers up, she'll keep her job, and then we can figure out something else.'"

"But it didn't stop there."

"Of course it didn't. Because once one person is doing it, and their numbers go up, everyone else sees it. And now they're all asking, 'How is Angela hitting quota when I'm barely keeping up?' And if I tell them the truth—that she's faking it—then either I admit we're committing fraud, or I have to let her keep doing it. And if I let her keep doing it, then everyone else has to do it too or they'll get fired for underperforming. It spread through the branch like a virus."

"Race to the bottom."

"Yeah. Exactly. And the worst part? Corporate loved our numbers. We went from red to green in six months. I got a performance bonus. Got asked to present my 'turnaround strategy' to other managers at a regional conference. And I'm standing there with a PowerPoint talking about 'increasing customer engagement' and 'building comprehensive relationships' when what I really meant was 'we're systematically defrauding our customers and I've taught my entire staff how to do it.'"

Marlowe pulled out a document. "This is from an internal Wells Fargo investigation. They estimate over two million fraudulent accounts created between 2011 and 2016. Two million."

"Sounds about right."

"Tommy. This isn't just your branch. This is systemic. Branches across the entire country doing the same thing. Why?"

"Because the optimization function was wrong," Tommy said. "Corporate said they wanted 'customer-centric banking.' But what they actually incentivized was 'product growth.' And those aren't the same thing. Not even close. Once you set up a system where people get rewarded for products and punished for not hitting product goals, they're going to optimize for products. Even if that means creating fake products for fake needs. Even if it means lying to customers. Even if it means forging signatures."

"Even though everyone knows it's wrong?"

"Everyone knows it's wrong. But everyone also knows that if they don't do it, someone else will, and then they'll be unemployed. So what are you supposed to do? Die on principle? I've got a mortgage. My wife has medical bills. My daughter's in college. You want me to tell them, 'Sorry, we're losing the house because I refused to game the sales metrics'?"

Marlowe closed her notebook. "You understand you're going to lose your job anyway now, right? Probably face criminal charges. The bank's already thrown you under the bus in their press releases—calling this a 'few bad apples' problem."

"Yeah. I know." Tommy looked up at her. "But at least I can tell my daughter I finally did the right thing. Even if it was years too late."

"One more question. When you were faking the accounts, opening credit cards without authorization, moving money around—did you ever think about the customers? The actual people?"

Tommy was quiet for a long time. "You know what's fucked up? I tried not to. Because if I thought about them—about Mrs. Rodriguez with her nine checking accounts she never asked for, about Mr. Kim whose credit score got tanked because we opened cards in his name—then I couldn't do my job. Couldn't make the numbers. Couldn't keep my team employed. So I optimized. Focused on the metrics. Made the system work for me. And I became exactly what the incentives told me to become."

He smiled, but it was the saddest thing Marlowe had ever seen.

"I became a cancer cell," Tommy said. "Maintained the appearance of cooperation while internally pursuing my own survival. And once I figured out the exploit, I spread it to every cell in my organism. That's what optimization does. That's what it always does when you get the objective function wrong."

 

Epilogue
--------

Later, Marlowe stood in the parking lot outside the Federal Building, trying to make sense of it all.

Tommy Vance wasn't evil. He was just an optimizer created by a larger optimization system. Wells Fargo said they wanted ethical banking, but they created an incentive structure that punished ethics and rewarded fraud. And once one person figured out the exploit—once one branch discovered you could hit your numbers by faking accounts—the information spread. Because it had to. Because everyone else was competing against those fake numbers, and the only way to compete was to fake your own.

It was Darwinian. Natural selection at the organizational level. The branches that maintained ethical standards got eliminated. The branches that learned to game the system survived and proliferated. And nobody at the top had to explicitly order fraud. They just had to create conditions where fraud was the fitness-maximizing strategy.

She thought about Detective Reese's report on Slick Mike. Same pattern. Cell optimizing for local fitness instead of global health. Maintaining the appearance of cooperation while internally pursuing its own objective. And once the strategy proved successful, spreading it to other cells.

Different scales. Same dynamics. Same inevitable outcome when you create optimizers that can develop their own internal objectives.

Her phone buzzed. Text from Sterling: "How bad is it?"

Marlowe looked back at the Wells Fargo building, thinking about those two million fake accounts. Thinking about all the Tommy Vances and Angelas who were just trying to survive in a system that punished doing the right thing.

"Metastatic," she typed back.

 

References & Further Reading
--------------------------------

On Cancer and Immune Evasion:

 Optimal cancer evasion in immune microenvironments \- Research on how cancer cells adaptively evade immune recognition
 Adaptive immunity maintains occult cancer in equilibrium \- The three phases of cancer immunoediting
 Cancer immunoediting and game theory \- Evolutionary game theoretical model of cancer-immune interactions
 Warburg Effect in Cancer Metabolism \- How cancer cells switch to glycolysis
 MHC Class I Downregulation \- Cancer's immune evasion strategies
 Cancer Immunoediting: Three Phases \- Elimination, equilibrium, and escape
 Mechanisms of Immune Evasion \- How tumors escape immune control

On Inner Misalignment and Mesa-Optimization:

 Mesa-Optimization: Explain it like I'm 10 \- Accessible introduction to the concept
 Risks from Learned Optimization \- The foundational paper on inner alignment
 Deception as the optimal strategy in mesa-optimization \- Why deceptive alignment emerges
 Clarifying the confusion around inner alignment \- Different perspectives on what inner alignment means

On the Wells Fargo Scandal:

 Wells Fargo cross-selling scandal - Wikipedia \- Comprehensive overview
 CFPB's $100 million fine announcement \- Official regulatory action
 Department of Justice $3 billion settlement \- Criminal and civil resolution
 Wells Fargo ethics case study \- Analysis of incentive gaming and conflicts of interest

On Multipolar Traps and Moloch:

 Meditations on Moloch \- Scott Alexander's seminal essay on coordination failures
 What multipolar failure looks like \- Application to AI safety
 Darwinian traps and existential risks \- How evolutionary pressures create coordination problems
===== END STORY nDzzxi3iXwNptRHJK =====

===== STORY id=e8gejXcTvaGYYh94k =====
Title: Omniscience one bit at a time: Chapter 1
Author: Dentosal
Year: 2025
Karma: 23
WordCount: 834
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/e8gejXcTvaGYYh94k/omniscience-one-bit-at-a-time-chapter-1
-----
I was on my nightly walk in the nearby forest. It was just past midnight. I was following a narrow path along the coastline, the full moon from a cloudless sky shining just bright enough for me to see. When the path took its last turn from the coast to inland, I noticed it. A faint blue glow, straight ahead, off the path, but not that far away. I was tired, but some things you just have to investigate. Hopefully there's not anybody there, would be quite embarrassing to bother them.

Not a person, apparently. Just a coin. It looked dark gray like steel, but it glowed blue. It wasn't a reflection, the light was definitely coming from the coin itself. Maybe you could do that with phosphorus. Or maybe it was radioactive? Either felt somewhat unsafe, but I wasn't about to leave it there. Not when it levitated above the ground. Using magnets, maybe? But the ground below seemed normal, just rocks and moss.

I picked it up. What's the worst that could happen? A long and agonizing death, probably. It was heavy and slightly warm, despite the near-zero air temperature. Remembering the story of warm magic cylinders that turned out to be strontium-90 and killed the men who found them, I quickly dropped it and took a few steps back. But it still levitated, in a different spot. Not magnetic, then. Magical? More likely I was just losing whatever sanity I had left. Oh well. If I'm going crazy, I might as well enjoy it.

So I picked up the coin again and took a closer look using the flashlight of my phone. It was perfectly round, without grooves, and reflected light like a mirror. One side bore the inscription iacta et scito along the edge, with a depiction of a tree in the middle. The other side had seemingly random straight lines, forming no picture, but looking rather intentional, definitely not scratches.

iacta et scito? Latin, probably. I don't know much Latin, but maybe iacta as in "alea iacta est", to throw? Knowledge is for losers, I thought, as the translate app told me the answer: "throw and know". Know what? If the coin really was magical, hopefully something important. So I balanced it on my thumb and flicked it in the air, barely caught it, and smacked it on the wrist of my left hand that was still holding the phone. The tree side was up, and I was none the wiser.

I started heading back home, not bothering to finish my normal route, pondering the riddle. What knowledge does a coin toss give you? The only thing I could think was the classic psychology trick: if you're unsure which action to take, determine it by coin toss, and if you're not pleased with the result, just pick the other one. That couldn't be the secret, magic wasted for a joke like that? I looked at the inscription again. Tree. Decision tree? Maybe I could ask it which branch to take? Or more generally, boolean-valued questions about the future?

I arrived back home, turned on the lights, and had a glass of water. The hypothesis wasn't trivial to test. If I was trying to predict the output of a random number generator, even a normal coin would give the right answer half of the time. Repeated tests would solve that, though. After ten tosses, the odds would already be about 1:1000. If this is worth doing, it's worth doing right, I thought, as I unlocked my laptop and opened a shell, typing in the first commands:

 

It looked like it should be, so it was time to proceed. I wrote my phrasing on a piece of paper:

 When I repeat the previous command in the Python interpreter that's open in front of me, if it prints out the number one, this coin toss lands tree side up. Otherwise, it will land on the side without a tree.

Then I said it aloud, clearly articulating each word, and tossed it. On the highest point of the arc, the blue glow flashed brightly and then fizzled out. It landed tree side up. I pressed the up arrow and enter, re-running the command.

 

"So the theory is indeed correct!", says system one. A second later, system two announces "One bit of evidence". Time to repeat the test; that was the correct answer anyway. Except, the coin no longer glowed blue. "Did I break it?" I said aloud, "Was it single-use only? Do I need to charge it somehow?" The only thing I was certain about was that googling "blue-glowing coin recharge" wouldn't bring up anything useful, and indeed the only results were from the world of video games.

One thing was certain. There would be no sleeping tonight.
===== END STORY e8gejXcTvaGYYh94k =====