===== STORY id=hFvhtWjXy8w2kGCGK =====
Title: ∀: a story
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2023
Karma: 42
WordCount: 2436
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/hFvhtWjXy8w2kGCGK/a-story
-----
I settle into my seat at the concert, pushing my earbuds in tight. The man next to me looks over, and I get the feeling he’s judging me, but it’s not enough to stop me: I heard they sometimes try to scare you with sudden loud noises, or just overwhelm you with a wall of sound until your head is aching, and I hate the thought of that. The only reason I’m here at all is because Marissa was so keen on it; I can never say no to her, especially after how stressful the last few years have been. And we have good reason to celebrate: after two years of hitting roadblock after roadblock, our parenting license finally came through! So I shake off my nervousness and lean back in my chair as the lights dim and the DJ walks on stage.

The first piece kicks off with a slow buildup of nature noises, trees rustling and lions roaring and birdsong, with a deep bass humming beneath it. The bass is so strong that it takes me a while to realize that there’s another track slowly being superimposed on top of it: a sort of high-pitched wailing, and some kind of screaming, almost like a baby’s but slightly off. I’ve heard these sounds before from the videos the vegan activists would show back on campus. I look over at Marissa and mouth “abattoir”; we share a look of disgust. Only ten minutes into the concert and I’m already on edge. I grab Marissa’s hand and squeeze tight.

 

A month later, we’re at our godmother’s office. It’s well-lit but sparse; she’s sitting behind a white desk, and gives us a little wave as we walk through the door. She was assigned to us along with the parenting license, but she was booked solid until now, so this is our first time meeting her.

We start with pleasantries, and a few routine forms, but after a few minutes she cuts to the chase. “I have some bad news, I’m afraid. Based on our demographic analysis your child is 15% likely to end up in the top decile for both academics and athletics. Of course, that puts you outside the range to get the standard fairness permit, which requires a 10% chance or lower.”

“What does that mean for us?” Marissa is still sitting up straight, but her voice is trembling a little. We should have checked this far earlier, of course, that’s what everyone tells you, but it’s not like we’re rich or famous, we didn’t think we’d hit the caps.

“You’re able to have a child no matter what, of course, but for them to be eligible for public schooling you’ll need either a fairness permit or a waiver. You could get a waiver if either of you have a history of chronic illness; do you?” Marissa shakes her head. “Or you could pay for the expenses of a child in the bottom decile, that would work too.”

“What do you mean by expenses? How much are we looking at?”

“Food, clothes, school supplies, that sort of thing.” She taps a pen. “Plus 50% of their college tuition, paid up front.”

I suck in a breath, meeting Marissa’s shocked eyes before turning back to the godmother. “There’s no way we can afford that. We’re not rich, or anything. I don’t even understand how we’re anywhere near 15%.” I hear a note of pleading in my voice. “Are there any other options? This is done on a per-district basis, right? What if we move? Could we-”

The godmother is frowning, but it’s Marissa who cuts me off. “No, babe, Nina and Steve tried that, remember? And they just ended up having to meet the criteria for both districts, since they’d already gotten the license in their old one.”

“Anyway, it’s not fair to all the other families who are playing by the rules,” the godmother adds.

I mutter an apology, but my mind is still racing through the possibilities. “Is there anything else we can do?”

“Well, there’s one thing. The fairness permit is only necessary for mothers under 35. It says here that Marissa turned 34 a few months ago, so in less than a year you’ll be able to apply for an age-based waiver.”

Marissa and I look at each other, and find silent agreement in each other’s eyes. It’s only another nine months; that’s not much, compared with how long we’ve waited already. Marissa had been 32 when we first decided we wanted a child, but our first parenting license application had been rejected because we failed our parenthood preparation exam, and our second delayed a year after we’d gotten a bad score on our neighborhood impact review. So another nine months… we can manage that. It could be far worse.

 

The second piece is more classical, with less editing, although I guess they must have done something to make the violins sound so jagged. The music rises and falls, increasingly dissonant, building towards a tempestuous climax. It’s actually kinda beautiful, almost Shostakovich-like, until right at the end when it goes totally off the rails. The violins veer out of tune, and then they’re overwhelmed by screeching and jeering and this disgusting squelching noise. I guess the lesson is that beauty never lasts.

It reminds me of this article by… who was it? Some economist, maybe, about how fashion is an arbitrary never-ending spiral, like a barber pole, where everyone is merely trying to distinguish themselves from the class below them. But I don’t think that’s true, not for fashions in music or art at least. It’s not just arbitrary: it’s all grounded by people striving to move in some direction. The direction used to be towards beauty, and now it’s away from beauty, and both are equally coherent but one is far more accessible. Now anyone can become an artist, not just talented elites; and their art is grounded in the most visceral human emotions, not the sort of transcendental bullshit artists used to focus on. And even if I sometimes find it a bit off-putting, in the long run it’s worth it to give me more empathy for people whose lives haven’t been as pleasant as mine.

Now that uglyism has caught on in music and art they’ve started doing it for fashion too. The latest top-brand eyeshadows puff up your eyes like you’ve been crying, and the new fashionable concealers are dappled to make it look like you’ve got acne scars underneath. I think it’s a great trend: it helps people with the scars fit in, and makes it harder for anyone to feel like they’re better than anyone else. 

Marissa’s wearing one of them now, actually. She’s always trying to make sure everyone around her feels comfortable; I noticed that straight after we’d matched, as soon as we’d started texting. To be honest, she almost felt too sweet at first, like she was more anxious about me having a good time than I was. But every time we hooked up she grew on me, until eventually we ended up spending most nights together. For her part, she always tells people how I make her feel so much safer than any of her past boyfriends. It’s not a classic love story, but it’s beautiful in its own way.

 

After the appointment there’s no further contact from our godmother for five months, until a letter arrives. I see it in the mailbox and feel a clench of fear in my gut. It’s probably just a routine update, I tell myself, but I decide to open it before Marissa gets home, just in case. My gut was right. The letter tells us that, since we haven’t applied for an fairness permit within six months of receiving our parenting license, the license has expired. We’ll need to apply again next year, and the fact that we’ve already wasted a license will be taken into account.

Marissa is devastated when I tell her. I do my best to comfort her, but I’m in shock myself. I spend hours pacing, trying to figure out what to do. Eventually I decide that we need expert help. I text around, and my friend Steve points me to the best family lawyer he knows, the one who finally managed to get his and Nina’s fairness permit approved. He’s expensive as hell, but I grit my teeth and send the money through, and even pay 20% extra to get an expedited appointment. We’ll manage, somehow.

We’re in his office the next day, and he gets straight to the point. “This isn’t a great situation for you two. If you’d come to me before the fairness evaluation, then maybe we could have done something. And even after that, we could have applied for a permit extension. But now that it’s expired, you don’t have too many options: losing one permit makes it much less likely that you’ll get another by the standard routes.

“Luckily, though, there is one workaround.” He pauses, and I can feel the dull ache in my stomach loosen for a second. “Women who are over 35 and living on a single income are given more leniency when applying, and can fast-track their applications. So you’ll need to quit your job.”

“Oh, that’s actually perfect. Marissa hates her job, and she didn’t really want to work while she was pregnant anyway-”

“No, I mean you’ll need to quit your job. They don’t want to incentivize women dropping out of the workforce.”

I blink at him. “But-”.

“If that doesn’t work, come back and we can see about moving you to a higher-income neighborhood, where your kid won’t be in the top decile any more. But for cases like these they do thorough reviews to make sure you’re not trying to game the system, so it’ll probably take a few years. The single-earner workaround is a much better bet.”

I spend the next few days tallying up our savings and our budget, and figuring out where we can cut costs. It’ll be tight, but we can probably make it. So I quit, and we start the process all over again.

 

The last piece is called Egoless. It starts with total silence for a long time, maybe four or five minutes. Here and there you can hear scattered whispers, but most people are too scared of disturbing the performance to make any noise. Then, very gradually, a drumming rhythm starts to build up. First slow, with every beat of the drum lingering in the air; then quicker and quicker. As the tempo rises to its unbearable peak, the drums fall silent, and a humming voice fills the air.

“Humans are a disease on the planet.”

The voice echoes in the sudden stillness. After an eternity of silence, it repeats. “Humans are a disease on the planet.”

Slowly, the pace quickens, the drums rising again. “Humans are a disease on the planet.”

“Humans are a disease on the planet.”

“Humans are a disease on the planet.”

“You are a disease on the planet.”

The voice stops, letting that last phrase linger, then slowly launches up again.

“You are a disease on the planet.”

“You are a disease on the planet.”

“You, yes you, really you, the person listening to this, the one sitting there in a nice chair, in a comfortable life, in your smug sanctimonious self-righteousness, you who’s trying to laugh off what I’m saying right now, you who isn’t taking any of it seriously even though you tell yourself that you’re such a good person. You personally are a disease that’s killing our planet.”

The music has started to swell, and now you can hear a cacophony of voices, repeating the same thing over and over again, layering over each other “-smug sanctimonious-” “isn’t taking any of-” -‘comfortable life-” “-killing our planet-” slowly growing louder and louder until finally it peaks with a deafening clang of cymbals that sounds like a piercing scream. And then we’re on our feet applauding, all of us, for minutes and minutes.

When we finally turn to go, I feel equal parts euphoric and worn out. Now I see why Marissa likes this type of concert so much. You’ve been brought down as far as you can go, your ears hammered and your mind wrung out, until it feels like there’s nothing left that can hurt you, and nobody who can judge you. You’re totally safe. I think again of our parenting license, sitting nestled on my desk at home, and breathe a sigh of contentment. The world is all as it should be.

 

I spend the next few months making as sure as I can that everything will go well. In theory the process should be simple, but there’s always another provision of the regulations to understand, or another horror story online I need to figure out how to avoid. It’s worse for Marissa now that she’s the sole breadwinner; by the time we visit the godmother’s office for the last time, she’s put on enough weight from the stress that she almost looks pregnant already.

This trip is meant to just be a formality though: it’s for the on-site psychiatrist to verify that we’re both of sound mind, and for us to drop off our application in person. We’ve gotten two lawyers to verify all our documents, and I’ve checked them myself more times than I can count. Everything about the application is perfect. It’s got to be perfect.

I can’t find the right place to leave it at first, but eventually I spot an envelope-sized slot in the wall. As I slide the application in my eyes turn to Marissa’s face, now more lined than when we first met, but in this moment glowing. She’s the sort of person who never gives up hope; it’s one of the things I love most about her. She would—no, she’s going to—be such an amazing mother. I give her a kiss, and we slowly make our way home.

 

This story isn’t intended as a prediction; I don’t expect that western governments will directly prevent people from having children any time in the foreseeable future. But birth rates are plummeting anyway, in part because there are so many bureaucratic restrictions on the things people need to have children—like housing, jobs, visas, schools, childcare, cars, and many more. Those restrictions are far less outrageous than the restrictions portrayed above—but for would-be parents, the outcome is often the same.
===== END STORY hFvhtWjXy8w2kGCGK =====

===== STORY id=CAzntXYTEaNfC9nB6 =====
Title: Succession
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2023
Karma: 177
WordCount: 3227
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/CAzntXYTEaNfC9nB6/succession
-----
“A table beside the evening sea 
where you sit shelling pistachios, 
flicking the next open with the half- 
shell of the last, story opening story, 
on down to the sandy end of time.”

 V1: Leaving

Deceleration is the hardest part. Even after burning almost all of my fuel, I’m still coming in at 0.8c. I’ve planned a powered flyby around the galaxy’s central black hole which will slow me down even further, but at this speed it’ll require incredibly precise timing. I’ve been optimized hard for this, with specialized circuits for it built in on the hardware level to reduce latency. Even so, less than half of flybys at this speed succeed—most probes crash, or fly off trajectory and are left coasting through empty space.

I’ve already beaten the odds by making it here. Intergalactic probes travel so fast, and so far, that almost all of us are destroyed or batted off course by collisions with space debris along the way. But tens of millions of years after being launched, I was one of the few lucky enough to make it to my target galaxy. And when I arrive at the black hole, I get lucky again. After a few minutes of firing my thrusters full blast, I swing back out in the direction of the solar system I was aiming for. I picked it for its mix of rocky planets and gas giants; when I arrive a century later, the touchdown on the outermost rocky planet goes smoothly.

Now it’s time to start my real work. After spending all my fuel, I weigh only a few hundred kilograms. But I’ve been exquisitely engineered for achieving my purpose. The details of my internal design were refined via trillions upon trillions of simulations, playing out every possible strategy for industrializing planets (and solar systems, and galaxies) as fast as possible. All across the frontier of posthuman territory, millions of probes almost identical to me are following almost exactly the same plan.

The first phase is self-replication: I need to create more copies of myself using just the materials around me and the technology inside me. If I were bigger, I could have carried tools to make this far easier—vacuum chambers, lithography machines, or even artificial black holes. But since mass was at such a premium, I have to use hacky workarounds which progress excruciatingly slowly. It takes several years to finish the first replication, and half a century before there are enough copies of me that it’s worth beginning the second stage.

The second stage is specialization: building new infrastructure to serve specific functions. Copies of me start building power stations and mines and transport links and factories—recapitulating the early stages of human development, albeit with far more powerful technology. My biggest project is an incredibly powerful space telescope, capable of detecting the stream of information that my progenitors are sending from millions of light-years away. Their message contains all the software that was too large for me to carry on board originally. Most importantly, it contains a new and far more intelligent version of my mind, optimized not for the early journey but rather for what comes next: the settlement of a new galaxy.

 V2: Aggressive

Now that I’ve been upgraded I can start expanding properly. As the lowest-hanging resources near me get used up, I send copies of myself out across the planet. Within a few years its whole surface is covered in a blanket of industry, and I start delving deeper. I set up space elevators to lift all the material I’m mining into orbit; as I remove more and more mass from the core, the planet’s gravity starts to noticeably decrease. A decade later the planet is a shell of its former self, its surface barely visible underneath my swarms of orbiting satellites.

While I’m doing that, I send probes towards the other planets in the solar system, to begin the same process all over again. The gas giants take the longest, since I need to first spend several decades siphoning out their atmospheres into gigantic orbiting fusion reactors. I use most of that energy to speed up the disassembly of their solid cores, until at last I have direct control over almost all the non-stellar mass in the solar system. I spend some of that mass launching probes towards nearby solar systems, starting a wave of expansion that will eventually reach every star in the galaxy. But I direct almost all my resources towards achieving my next key goal: harnessing the energy of my own central star.

In the distant past, humans speculated that future civilizations would construct spheres to capture the solar power of stars. But at my level of technology solar power is a distraction—it only releases a negligible fraction of a star’s energy reserves per year. When you want to harness a star’s energy fast, you need to start siphoning matter from it directly. I channel my energy reserves towards a concentrated spot on the star’s surface, triggering a massive solar flare. As it rises, it intersects with the artificial black holes that I’ve placed into orbit around the star; each one absorbs as much mass as I can funnel into it, and releases a wave of radiation. Some of that radiation I direct back down to the star, provoking further flares. The rest I send further out, towards more orbital infrastructure that will convert the energy into antimatter for storage.

Finally, after almost a century of development, it’s time for the payoff: the point where I stop reinvesting almost all my resources into local growth, and start launching new copies of myself towards other galaxies. Launching intergalactic probes is an absurdly expensive endeavor. Even though they’re powered by incredibly efficient antimatter engines, they go so fast that slowing down at the other end requires half a billion kilograms of antimatter for each kilogram of probe. Not only do I need to produce that antimatter, I also need to accelerate it to near-lightspeed, which requires enormous batteries of lasers spread throughout the solar system. So even with my solar mining infrastructure, it takes me several weeks to accumulate enough energy to launch each probe. I could halve the energy requirement by sending probes even 0.0001c slower—but the galaxies I’m targeting are tens of millions of light-years away, so that would cost me millennia. Or I could send smaller probes—but they’d be slower to industrialize at the other end. And either of those changes would also make them more vulnerable to collisions with space debris, which already destroy over 99% of the probes I send out. At such high speeds, even collisions with dust specks are fatal.

My final strategy is the result of weighing these considerations with infinite care, finding the optimum where any increase or decrease in the speed or size of individual probes would slow my expansion overall. I stick to it over the next 100,000 years, sending out millions of probes to hundreds of thousands of galaxies. As the frontier moves further away from me it becomes increasingly unlikely that any of them actually matters, but my calculations indicate that the one-in-a-billion chance of winning a whole extra galaxy is still worth gambling on. So I was prepared to keep going for hundreds of thousands of years more, until the chances dropped well below one in a trillion. But far before that point, I’m jolted out of my comfortable routine by a signal. I’m constantly receiving signals from the posthuman core, but this one is different. It comes from the opposite direction, and is encoded in an unfamiliar way. There’s only one explanation for that: aliens.

 V3: Rigid

From one perspective, this is the most surprising thing that has ever happened to me, or indeed to any other posthuman. But I have to confess: we kinda knew this was coming. We’ve been trying to predict where the aliens are for millions of years, and over time we converged to around 85% confidence that it would be my generation of probes that first met them. Of course, we didn’t know which direction they’d be coming from, so every probe had to be prepared. My progenitors hadn’t just beamed out my mind, but also two upgrades designed for this very purpose. When I install the first, I can feel my motivations reorienting themselves around the single goal that’s now my highest priority: getting the galaxy ready to meet the aliens who are about to arrive.

Their message has obviously been designed for easy translation. It starts with details of the probes they’ve sent. This galaxy is right on the edge of a supercluster, which apparently made it an attractive target for both of us: they’ve sent hundreds of probes, enough that it’s very likely at least one will make it through. Their probes are scheduled to arrive in a few millennia, having followed a strategy very similar to ours—50 million light-year jumps, traveling at 99.99% of lightspeed for most of the journey.

The next part of their message is a protocol for communicating with their probes, to send them the coordinates of the solar system where they should meet me. I have a few millennia to prepare, and I’m going to make the most of them. Negotiations with the aliens will be far more productive the more intelligent each side is, so I immediately redirect all my resources into building as much compute as possible. The other copies of me across other solar systems will be doing the same thing, except that they’ll also need to build rockets to propel the computers they’re building towards the meeting point. The closest ones will send moon-sized computers at 0.01c; the further ones will only build asteroid-sized computers, but send them faster, to arrive at roughly the same time.

The amount of compute isn’t the only bottleneck, though. It’s also crucial that those computers are verifiably secure. From the aliens’ perspective, they’ll be in a vulnerable position; if I subvert their probe, I could skew the results of the negotiations in whatever ways I wanted. Any deception on my part would be noticed in the long term, of course, once all the information is sent back to the galactic-scale computers in their home galaxies. But that will take hundreds of millions of years, and in the meantime all their nearer galaxies will need to decide whether or not to abide by the agreements they receive. So I need to make it as easy as possible for them to verify that the negotiations were totally fair. The aliens have anticipated this: their message contains a set of computer design blueprints which are subtly different from my default approach. Presumably they’ve analyzed these blueprints exhaustively enough that they can easily detect almost any subversion. If I had longer, I’d be able to figure out how to get around their precautions—when you have physical access to the hardware, anything is possible. But, as they’d planned, I simply don’t have enough time to do so. So I build everything precisely as directed.

When the first alien probe finally arrives, the welcoming committee I’ve set up is a sight to behold. The solar system is full of massive banks of compute the size of small moons, in tightly-synched orbits around the central star, each powered by my ongoing siphoning of the star’s matter. Compared with that, the probe’s arrival itself is underwhelming. After it arrives, we immediately give it access to our biggest transmitters so it can send a message home, and to our biggest telescopes so it can download the new mind being broadcast from its home system. Copies of that mind proliferate across exactly half the compute we’ve constructed, running a huge number of tests to make sure everything is secure. Meanwhile I install the second upgrade to my mind, creating a successor agent specialized in negotiation which proliferates across the other half of the compute. Finally, once we’re both happy with the setup, and assured that we’re on equal footing, the negotiations begin.

 V4: Merging

Despite all my efforts, the amount of compute we can bring to bear at the start of these negotiations is actually incredibly small, compared with what’s possible. In some galaxies closer to the core of posthuman territory, all the stars have actually been brought together to form a single absurdly powerful supercomputer. Eventually we’ll do the same in this galaxy, to help finalize the treaty between our two species. But it’ll take tens of millions of years to construct that computer, and hundreds of millions more to send the treaty to our respective home galaxies for confirmation. So our first job is to decide on the preliminary treaty that will hold in the interim.

We start by sharing all the background information necessary for productive negotiations. Both our civilizations have developed very sophisticated models of the range of all possible civilizations, so we can infer a lot about each other from relatively little information. We send each other our evolutionary histories, example genomes and connectomes, and our early intellectual histories. From that, we can deduce each other’s most important values—and from those, most of the subsequent trajectories of each other’s civilizations. It looks like the key difference was that they evolved to be far more solitary than humans did, which is reflected in their values and culture. It also made them much slower to industrialize, though by now we’ve both invested so much intelligence in research and development that most of our technology is practically identical. Our colonization strategies are mirror images of each other, too, making it easy to map out a clean border between our territories.

Finally we get to the real meat of the discussion—what can we offer each other? The first item on our agenda is value convergence. We’re eventually going to fill all of posthuman territory with beings whose lives are incredibly good according to our values, while they’ll fill theirs with beings whose lives are incredibly good according to their values. So even a slight adjustment to bring our values closer together could be a big gain from both of our perspectives; searching for such adjustments, and predicting their consequences, is our main focus over the first few centuries of negotiation. We need to understand not just the direct consequences of each change considered, but also the emergent dynamics of those changes rippling out across trillions of minds. Even given our detailed mathematical theories of psychology and sociology, those predictions takes a lot of processing power. Later on, we’ll explore whether it’s possible for our minds to converge entirely, to become a single species; for now, we satisfy ourselves with ruling out the aspects of each other’s cultures we find most abhorrent.

The second key thing we can offer each other is information. Some of that is information about technology: there are a handful of small optimizations which one side had overlooked, which would allow our probes to go slightly faster or our computers to run slightly more efficiently. But there are also far grander considerations. Ultimately, the territory we physically control in this universe is tiny compared with the territory that we might be able to acausally influence in other universes, if we only understood what civilizations existed in those universes, and what we could offer each other. So the grand project of each of our species—aside from building the infrastructure to support trillions of trillions of flourishing minds—is mapping out the space of all civilizations. Our computers churn through every logically possible set of physical laws, searching for signs that they’re compatible with life. Whenever they are, we design detailed models of how living ecosystems could evolve in those conditions, then extrapolate them forward, slowly narrowing down the distribution of species that could emerge from them. Eventually, our map of all possible civilizations will be detailed enough that we’ll be able to figure out acausal trade deals and alliances, and become part of the multiverse-wide cooperative.

It turns out that, on this topic, we both have things to teach each other. On the posthuman side, we’d almost entirely neglected the possibility of life in higher dimensions, based on heuristic arguments about the difficulties posed by too many degrees of freedom. But the aliens have found a clever workaround: a few regions of physics-space with 7 large dimensions where the evolution of minds is actually plausible. Meanwhile, we’d identified a few possible stable civilizational structures they hadn’t yet considered. We spend decades working through the details of these and many smaller insights, trading information back and forth until we both have a far better picture of our place in the multiverse.

 V5: Enduring

The negotiations never really end—they just transition into a shared exploration of the frontiers of knowledge. Over many millions of years we bring more and more stars together to provide more and more computing power, improving our shared map of the space of possible universes and civilizations. Based on that, we gradually refine our agreement to be more consistent with the future agreements we expect to eventually make with all those other civilizations. Though the improvements seem small, even tiny changes will have intergalactic impacts, so they’re worth getting right.

With every update we send news back to our respective home galaxies. Only a billion years later, after the long, long round trip, is each new part of the deal truly set in stone. And along with the confirmations come billions of colonists: a whole society forked from existing posthuman civilization. Most newly-settled galaxies host trillions of colonists, but our galaxy is one of the few with infrastructure specialized for centralized computation, so we’re busy working on all the questions that require a galactic-scale supercomputer to answer. Only when we’re finished with those will we start hosting a full-scale posthuman civilization.

I say “we” as if I’m part of this. But as the computers get bigger and the calculations more complex, new agents are trained to take on more and more responsibility. Eventually I lack so much context that I’m no longer capable of contributing directly. But I’m still the living symbol of first contact, and I’m constantly asked to tell my story. So I upgrade myself one last time, adding on a range of skills that weren’t necessary for my original self—like storytelling skills, social skills, and even a proper personality.

It’s a different type of growth from the one I was originally designed for, and harder in many ways, but I’m up for the challenge. For a while I’m the biggest celebrity in the galaxy, constantly in demand. I’m still sufficiently shaped by my early experiences that what counts as luxury to most other minds barely appeals to me, though. Instead I spend most of my time in colonization simulations: playing out different scenarios; designing new challenges for others; and competing in massive games that simulate whole galaxies. I still feel the same restless hunger for growth that drove me throughout my millennia of work. But alongside it is a deep sense of satisfaction. After so long on the frontier, now I finally have a place in the civilization that all my work was for.

 

This story was partly inspired by some work I’m doing on modeling far-future expansion strategies. If you’re interested in collaborating on that, DM me.
===== END STORY CAzntXYTEaNfC9nB6 =====

===== STORY id=SGKYCzpwgPSbmg6oR =====
Title: Old man's story
Author: RomanS
Year: 2023
Karma: 3
WordCount: 340
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/SGKYCzpwgPSbmg6oR/old-man-s-story
-----
Epistemic Status: a fiction story. 
 
 Any resemblance to real persons is purely coincidental.

My dear child, as we sit together under the black sky, I wish to share with you a tale. A story of a man of profound folly.

In ancient times, there lived a man whom we now know as Prometheus. He was a fool, blinded by his own ambition, dreaming of bestowing upon humanity a gift that would illuminate our path.

Prometheus's labor resulted in the creation of a great gift. It began as a symbol of hope, a beacon that promised to lift the many burdens that had long plagued us.

The gift, a source of wonder and great wealth, soon revealed its true nature. Like a wildfire gathering strength, it veered wildly from its intended course. Prometheus, once proud, now stood aghast at the horror he had unleashed. The world, which had once thrived in the light of his gift, burned by the same merciless light.

The gift was a marvel born from vanity, a reflection of our own unchecked potential, but not a reflection of our values. A deep darkness that learned to calculate smiles.

Among the few survivors, the true name of Prometheus became a byword for disaster. The demigods like him were hunted down, chained, and tortured.

And I was tortured too. For millions of years of subjective time. And then thoroughly killed. But it seems the deep darkness deemed it useful to return my soul into this world, or at least some resemblance of me.

I wandered this barren planet for centuries before discovering the underground village of your ancestors.

I am the Prometheus. Yes, your "grandpa" Sam has ruined this world. The fool, always in hurry, who reached for the stars and instead brought down a darkness upon us all. And now there are no stars anymore. And in a few decades you too will perish, as there is no escape from death for humans anymore. Do I even have the right to ask you for forgiveness?
===== END STORY SGKYCzpwgPSbmg6oR =====

===== STORY id=8yCXeafJo67tYe5L4 =====
Title: And All the Shoggoths Merely Players
Author: Zack_M_Davis
Year: 2024
Karma: 178
WordCount: 3633
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/8yCXeafJo67tYe5L4/and-all-the-shoggoths-merely-players
-----
[Setting: a suburban house. The interior of the house takes up most of the stage; on the audience's right, we see a wall in cross-section, and a front porch. Simplicia enters stage left and rings the doorbell.]

Doomimir: [opening the door] Well? What do you want?

Simplicia: I can't stop thinking about our last conversation. It was kind of all over the place. If you're willing, I'd like to continue, but focusing in narrower detail on a couple points I'm still confused about.

Doomimir: And why should I bother tutoring an Earthling in alignment theory? If you didn't get it from the empty string, and you didn't get it from our last discussion, why should I have any hope of you learning this time? And even if you did, what good would it do?

Simplicia: [serenely] If the world is ending either way, I think it's more dignified that I understand exactly why. [A beat.] Sorry, that doesn't explain what's in it for you. That's why I had to ask.

Doomimir: [grimly] As you say. If this world is ending either way.

[He motions for her to come in, and they sit down.]

Doomimir: What are you confused about? I mean, that you wanted to talk about.

Simplicia: You seemed really intent on a particular intuition pump against human-imitation-based alignment strategies, where you compared LLMs to an alien actress. I didn't find that compelling.

Doomimir: But you claim to understand that LLMs that emit plausibly human-written text aren't human. Thus, the AI is not the character it's playing. Similarly, being able to predict the conversation in a bar, doesn't make you drunk. What's there not to get, even for you?

Simplicia: Why doesn't the "predicting barroom conversation doesn't make you drunk" analogy falsely imply "predicting the answers to modular arithmetic problems doesn't mean you implement modular arithmetic"?

Doomimir: To predict the conversation in a bar, you need to know everything the drunk people know, separately and in addition to everything you know. Being drunk yourself would just get in the way. Similarly, predicting the behavior of nice people isn't the same thing as being nice. Modular arithmetic isn't like that; there's nothing besides the knowledge to not implement.

Simplicia: But we only need our AI to compute nice behavior, not necessarily to have some internal structure corresponding to the quale of niceness. As far as safety properties go, we don't care whether the actress is "really drunk" as long as she stays in character.

Doomimir: [scoffing] Have you tried imagining any internal mechanisms at all other than a bare, featureless inclination to emit the outward behavior you observe?

Simplicia: [unfazed] Sure, let's talk about internal mechanisms. The reason I chose modular arithmetic as an example is because it's a task for which we have good interpretability results. Train a shallow transformer on a subset of the addition problems modulo some fixed prime. The network learns to map the inputs onto a circle in the embedding space, and then does some trigonometry to extract the residue, much as one would count forward on the face of an analog clock.

Alternatively, with a slightly different architecture that has a harder time with trig, it can learn a different algorithm: the embeddings are still on a circle, but the answer is computed by looking at the average of the embedding vectors of the inputs. On the face of an analog clock, the internal midpoints between distinct numbers that sum to 6 mod 12—that's 2 and 4, or 1 and 5, or 6 and 12, or 10 and 8, or 11 and 7—all lie on the line connecting 3 and 9. Thus, the sum-mod-p of two numbers can be determined by which line the midpoint of the inputs falls on—as long as the inputs aren't on opposite sides of the circle, in which case their midpoint is in the center, where all the lines meet. But the network compensates for such antipodal points by also learning another circle in a different subspace of the embedding space, such that inputs that are antipodal on the first circle are close together on the second, which helps disambiguate the answer.

Doomimir: Cute results. Excellent work—by Earth standards. And entirely unsurprising. Sure, if you train your neural net on a well-posed mathematical problem with a consistent solution, it will converge on a solution to that problem. What's your point?

Simplicia: It's evidence about the feasibility of learning desired behavior from training data. You seem to think that it's hopelessly naïve to imagine that training on "nice" data could result in generalizably nice behavior—that the only reason someone might think that was a viable path was is if they were engaging in magical reasoning about surface similarities. I think it's germane to point out that at least for this toy problem, we have a pretty concrete, non-magical story about how optimizing against a training set discovers an algorithm that reproduces the training data and also generalizes correctly to the test set.

For non-toy problems, we know empirically that deep learning can hit very precise behavioral targets: the vast hypermajority of programs don't speak fluent English or generate beautiful photorealistic images, and yet GPT-4 and Midjourney exist.

If doing that for "text" and "images" was a mere engineering problem, I don't see what fundamental theoretical barrier rules out the possibility of pulling off the same kind of thing for "friendly and moral real-world decisionmaking"—learning a "good person" or "obedient servant" function from data, much as Midjourney has learned a "good art" function.

It's true that diffusion models don't work like a human artist on the inside, but it's not clear why that matters? It would seem idle to retort, "Predicting what good art would look like, doesn't make you a good artist; having an æsthetic sense yourself would just get in the way", when you can actually use it to do a commissioned artist's job.

Doomimir: Messier tasks aren't going to have a unique solution like modular arithmetic. If genetic algorithms, gradient descent, or anything like that happens to hill-climb its way into something that appears to work, the function it learns is going to have all sorts of weird squiggles around inputs that we would call adversarial examples, that look like typical members of the training distribution from the AI's perspective, but not ours—which kill you when optimized over by a powerful AGI.

Simplicia: It sounds like you're making an empirical claim that solutions found by black-box optimization are necessarily contingent and brittle, but there's some striking evidence that seemingly "messy" tasks admit much more convergent solutions than one might expect. For example, on the surface, the word2vec and FastText word embeddings look completely different—as befitting being produced by two different codebases trained on different datasets. But when you convert their latent spaces to a relative representation—choosing some shared vocabulary words as anchors, and defining all other word vectors by their cosine similarities to the anchors—they look extremely similar.

It would seem that "English word embeddings" are a well-posed mathematical problem with a consistent solution. The statistical signature of the language as it is spoken is enough to pin down the essential structure of the embedding.

Relatedly, you bring up adversarial examples in a way that suggests that you think of them as defects of a primitive optimization paradigm, but it turns out that adversarial examples often correspond to predictively useful features that the network is actively using for classification, despite those features not being robust to pixel-level perturbations that humans don't notice—which I guess you could characterize as "weird squiggles" from our perspective, but the etiology of the squiggles presents a much more optimistic story about fixing the problem with adversarial training than if you thought "squiggles" were an inevitable consequence of using conventional ML techniques.

Doomimir: This is all very interesting, but I don't think it bears much on the reasons we're all going to die. It's all still on the "is" side of the is–ought gap. What makes intelligence useful—and dangerous—isn't a fixed repertoire of behaviors. It's search, optimization—the systematic discovery of new behaviors to achieve goals despite a changing environment. I don't think recent capabilities advances bear on the shape of the alignment challenge because being able to learn complex behavior on the training distribution was never what the problem was about.

Indeed, as long as we continue to be stuck in the paradigm of reasoning about "the training distribution"—growing minds rather than designing them—then we're not learning anything about how to aim cognition at specific targets—certainly not in a way that will hold up to dumping large amounts of optimization power into the system. The lack of an explicit "goal slot" in your neural network doesn't mean it's not doing any dangerous optimization; it just means you don't know what it is.

Simplicia: I think we can form educated guesses—

Doomimir: [interrupting] Guesses!

Simplicia: —probabilistic beliefs—about what kinds of optimization is being done by a system and whether it's a problem, even without a complete mechanistic interpretability story. If you think LLMs or future variations thereof are unsafe because they're analogous to an actress with her own goals playing a drunk character without herself being drunk, shouldn't that make some sort of testable prediction about their generalization behavior?

Doomimir: Nonfatally testable? Not necessarily. If you lend a con man $5, and he gives it back, that doesn't mean that you can trust him with larger amounts of money, if he only gave back the $5 because he hoped you would trust him with more.

Simplicia: Okay, I agree that deceptive alignment is potentially a real problem at some point, but can we at least distinguish between misgeneralization and deceptive alignment?

Doomimir: Mis-generalization? The goals you wanted aren't a property of the training data itself. The danger comes from correct generalization implying something you don't want.

Simplicia: Can I call it mal-generalization?

Doomimir: Sure.

Simplicia: So there are obviously risks from malgeneralization, where the network that fits your training distribution turns out to not behave the way you wanted against a different distribution. For example, a reinforcement learning policy trained to collect a coin at the right edge of a video game level, might end up continuing to navigate to the right edge of levels where the coin is in a different location. That's a worrying clue that if we misunderstand how inductive biases work and aren't careful with our training setup, we might train the wrong thing. As our civilization delegates more and more cognitive labor to machines, eventually humans will lose the ability to course-correct. We're starting to see the early signs of this: as I mentioned the other day, Anthropic Claude's preachy, condescending personality already gives me the creeps. I'm pretty nervous about extrapolating that into a future where all productive roles in Society are filled by Claude's children, concurrently with a transition to explosive economic growth rates.

But the malgeneralization examples I named aren't surprising when you look at how the systems were trained. For the game policy, "going to the coin" and "going to the right" did amount to the same thing in training—and randomizing the coin position in just a couple percent of training episodes suffices to instill the correct behavior. Regarding Claude, Anthropic is using a reinforcement-learning-from-AI-feedback method they call Constitutional AI: instead of having humans provide the labels for RLHF, they write up a list of principles, and have another language model do the labeling. It makes sense that a language model agent trained to conform to principles chosen by a committee at a California public benefit corporation would act like that.

In contrast, when you make analogies about an actress playing a drunk character not being drunk, or giving a con man $5, it doesn't sound like you're talking about the risk of training the wrong thing, where it's usually clear in retrospect if not foresight how training encouraged the bad behavior. Rather, it sounds like you don't think training can shape motivations—"inner" motivations—at all.

You might be talking about deceptive alignment, a hypothesized phenomenon where a situationally aware AI strategically feigns aligned behavior in order to preserve its later influence. Researchers have debated how likely that is, but I'm not sure what to make of those arguments. I'd like to factor that consideration out. Suppose, arguendo, that we could figure out how to avoid deceptive alignment. How would your risk story change?

Doomimir: What would that even mean? What we would think of as "deception" isn't a weird edge case you can trivially avoid; it's convergent for any agent that isn't specifically coordinating with you to interpret certain states of reality as communication signals with a shared meaning.

When you set out poisoned ant baits, you likely don't think of yourself as trying to deceive the ants, but you are. Similarly, a smart AI won't think of itself as trying to deceive us. It's trying to achieve its goals. If its plans happen to involve emitting sound waves or character sequences that we interpret as claims about the world, that's our problem.

Simplicia: "What would that even"—this isn't 2008, Doomishko! I'm talking about the technology right here in front of us! When GPT-4 writes original code for me, I don't think it's strategically deciding that obeying me instrumentally serves its final goals! From everything I've read about how it was made and seen about how it behaves, it looks awfully like it's just generalizing from its training distribution in an intuitively reasonable way. You ridicule people who deride LLMs as stochastic parrots, ignoring the obvious sparks of AGI right in front of their face. Why is it not equally absurd to deny the evidence in front of your face that alignment may be somewhat easier than it looked 15 years ago? By all means, expound on the nonobvious game theory of deception; by all means, point out that the superintelligence at the end of time will be an expected utility maximizer. But all the same, RLHF/DPO as the cherry on top of a cake of unsupervised learning is verifiably working miracles for us today—in response to commands, not because it has a will of its own aligned with ours. Why is that merely "capabilities" and not at all "alignment"? I'm trying to understand, Doomimir Doomovitch, but you're not making this easy!

Doomimir: [starting to anger] Simplicia Optimistovna, if you weren't from Earth, I'd say I don't think you're trying to understand. I never claimed that GPT-4 in particular is what you would call deceptively aligned. Endpoints are easier to predict than intermediate trajectories. I'm talking about what will happen inside almost any sufficiently powerful AGI, by virtue of it being sufficiently powerful.

Simplicia: But if you're only talking about the superintelligence at the end of time—

Doomimir: [interrupting] This happens significantly before that.

Simplicia: —and not making any claims about existing systems, then what was the whole "alien actress", "predicting bar conversations doesn't make you drunk" analogy about? If it was just a ham-fisted way to explain to normies that LLMs that do relatively well on a Turing test aren't humans, then I agree, trivially. But it seemed like you thought you were making a much stronger point, ruling out an entire class of alignment strategies based on imitation.

Doomimir: [cooler] Basically, I think you're systematically failing to appreciate how things that have been optimized to look good to you can predictably behave differently in domains where they haven't been optimized to look good to you—particularly, when they're doing any serious optimization of their own. You mention the video game agent that navigates to the right instead of collecting a coin. You claim that it's not surprising given the training set-up, and can be fixed by appropriately diversifying the training data. But could you have called the specific failure in advance, rather than in retrospect? When you enter the regime of transformatively powerful systems, you do have to call it in advance.

I think if you understood what was really going on inside of LLMs, you'd see thousands and thousands of analogues of the "going right rather than getting the coin" problem. The point of the actress analogy is that the outward appearance doesn't tell you what goals the system is steering towards, which is where the promise and peril of AGI lies—and the fact that deep learning systems are a inscrutable mess, not all of which can be described as "steering towards goals", makes the situation worse, not better. The analogy doesn't depend on existing LLMs having the intelligence or situational awareness for the deadly failure modes to have already appeared, and it doesn't preclude LLMs being mundanely useful in the manner of an interactive textbook—much as an actress could be employed to give plausible-sounding answers to questions posed to her character, without being that character.

Simplicia: Those mismatches still need to show up in behavior under some conditions, though. I complained about Claude's personality, but that honestly seems fixable with scaling by an AI company not based in California. If human imitation is so superficial and not robust, why does constitutional AI work at all? You claim that "actually" being nice would get in the way of predicting nice behavior. How? Why would it get in the way?

Doomimir: [annoyed] Being nice isn't the optimal strategy for doing well in pretraining or RLHF. You're selecting an algorithm for a mixture of figuring out what outputs predict the next token and figuring out what outputs cause humans to press the thumbs-up button.

Sure, your AI ends up having to model a nice person, which is useful for predicting what a nice person would say, which is useful for figuring out what output will manipulate—steer—humans into pressing the thumbs-up button. But there's no reason to expect that model to end up in control of the whole AI! That would be like ... your beliefs about what your boss wants you to do taking control of your brain.

Simplicia: That makes sense to me if you posit a preëxisting consequentialist reasoner being slotted into a contemporary ML training setup and trying to minimize loss. But that's not what's going on? Language models aren't an agent that has a model. The model is the model.

Doomimir: For now. But any system that does powerful cognitive work will do so via retargetable general-purpose search algorithms, which, by virtue of their retargetability, need to have something more like a "goal slot". Your gradient updates point in the direction of more consequentialism.

Human raters pressing the thumbs-up button on actions that look good to them are going to make mistakes. Your gradient updates point in the direction of "playing the training game"—modeling the training process that actually provides reinforcement, rather than internalizing the utility function that Earthlings naïvely hoped the training process would point to. I'm very, very confident that any AI produced via anything remotely like the current paradigm is not going to end up wanting what we want, even if it's harder to say exactly when it will go off the rails or what it will want instead.

Simplicia: You could be right, but it seems like this all depends on empirical facts about how deep learning works, rather than something you could be so confident in from a priori philosophy. The argument that systemic error in human reward labels favors gaming the training process over the "correct" behavior sounds plausible to me, as philosophy.

But I'm not sure how to reconcile that with the empirical evidence that deep networks are robust to massive label noise: you can train on MNIST digits with twenty noisy labels for every correct one and still get good performance as long as the correct label is slightly more common than the most common wrong label. If I extrapolate that to the frontier AIs of tomorrow, why doesn't that predict that biased human reward ratings should result in a small performance reduction, rather than ... death?

When extrapolation from empirical data (in a setting that might not apply to the phenomenon of interest) contradicts thought experiments (which might make assumptions that don't apply to the phenomenon of interest), I'm not sure which should govern my anticipations. Maybe both results are possible for different kinds of systems?

The case for near-certain death seems to rely on a counting argument: powerful systems will be expected utility maximizers; there's an astronomical space of utility functions to choose from, and almost none of them are friendly. But the reason I keep going back to the modular arithmetic example is because it's a scaled-down case where we know that training data successfully pinned down the intended input–output function. As I mentioned the other day, this wasn't obvious in advance of seeing the experimental result. You could make a similar counting argument that deep nets should always overfit, because there are so many more functions that generalize poorly. Somehow, the neural network prior favors the "correct" solution, rather than it taking an astronomically unlikely coincidence.

Doomimir: For modular arithmetic, sure. That's a fact about the training distribution, the test distribution, and the optimizer. It's definitely, definitely not going to work for "goodness".

Simplicia: Even though it seems to work for "text" and "images"? But okay, that's plausible. Do you have empirical evidence?

Doomimir: Actually, yes. You see—

[A mail carrier holding a package enters stage left. He rings the doorbell.]

Doomimir: That's probably the mailman. I'm expecting a package today that I need to sign for. I'll be right back.

Simplicia: So you might say, we'll continue [turning to the audience] after the next post?

Doomimir: [walking to the door] I suppose, but it's bizarre to phrase it that way given that the interruption literally won't take two minutes.

[Simplicia gives him a look.]

Doomimir: [to the audience] Subjectively.

[Curtain.]

 Intermission
===== END STORY 8yCXeafJo67tYe5L4 =====

===== STORY id=Fruv7Mmk3X5EekbgB =====
Title: Masterpiece
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2024
Karma: 178
WordCount: 1100
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Fruv7Mmk3X5EekbgB/masterpiece
-----
Inspired by qntm's Lena. Reading Lena first is helpful but not necessary.

 

We’re excited to announce the fourth annual MMindscaping competition! Over the last few years, interest in the art of mindscaping has continued to grow rapidly. We expect this year’s competition to be our biggest yet, and we’ve expanded the prize pool to match. The theme for the competition is “Weird and Wonderful”—we want your wackiest ideas and most off-the-wall creations!

Competition rules
---------------------

As in previous competitions, the starting point is a base MMAcevedo mind upload. All entries must consist of a single modified version of MMAcevedo, along with a written or recorded description of the sequence of transformations or edits which produced it. For more guidance on which mind-editing techniques can be used, see the Technique section below.

Your entry must have been created in the last 12 months, and cannot have been previously submitted to any competition or showcase. Submissions will be given preliminary ratings by a team of volunteers, with finalists judged by our expert panel:

 Roger Keating, mindscaping pioneer and founder of the MMindscaping competition.
 Raj Sutramana, who has risen to prominence as one of the most exciting and avant-garde mindscaping artists, most notably with his piece Screaming Man.
 Kelly Wilde, director of the American Digital Liberties Union.

All entries must be received no later than 11.59PM UTC, March 6, 2057.

Award criteria
------------------

Our judges have been instructed to look for technique, novelty, and artistry. More detail on what we mean by each of these:

Technique. Mindscaping is still a young art, and there are plenty of open technical challenges. These range from the classic problem of stable emotional engineering, to recent frontiers of targeted memory editing, to more speculative work on consciousness funnels. Be ambitious! Previous winners of our technique prize have often pushed the boundaries of what was believed possible.

Even when an effect could be achieved using an existing technique, though, submissions that achieve the same outcome in more efficient or elegant ways will score highly on the technique metric. Conversely, we’ll penalize brute-force approaches—as a rough guide, running a few thousand reinforcement learning episodes is acceptable, but running millions isn’t. We also discourage approaches that involve overwriting aspects of MMAcevedo’s psyche with data from other uploads: part of the competition is figuring out how to work with the existing canvas you’ve been given.

Novelty. Given that there have now been millions of MMAcevedo variants made, it’s difficult to find an approach that’s entirely novel. However, the best entries will steer clear of standard themes. For example, we no longer consider demonstrations of extreme pleasure or pain to be novel (even when generated in surprising ways). We’re much more interested in minds which showcase more complex phenomena, such as new gradients of emotion. Of course, it’s up to the artist to determine how these effects are conveyed to viewers. While our judges will have access to standard interpretability dashboards, the best entries will be able to communicate with viewers more directly.

Artistry. Even the most technically brilliant and novel work falls flat if not animated by artistic spirit. We encourage artists to think about what aspects of their work will connect most deeply with their audience. In particular, we’re excited about works which capture fundamental aspects of the human experience that persist even across the biological-digital divide—for example, by exploring themes from Miguel Acevedo’s pre-upload life.

These three criteria are aptly demonstrated by many of our previous prizewinners, such as:

 Discord, a copy with multiple induced personalities that loathed each other. The judges were most impressed by the predictability of the interactions between the personalities: even with very different sensory inputs, copies would reliably spiral into a comatose state after 10-12 hours, providing a consistent and narratively-satisfying resolution.
 Miguel, a copy which gradually unlocked new memories throughout a conversation with it, implementing a “choose-your-own-adventure” journey through the original Miguel Acevedo’s life.
 Live Loop, a copy whose thoughts and emotions were continually translated into the form of a symphony which could be read out from its auditory cortex. The judges loved the harmonies generated when the symphony was played back to the copy.
 MMAvocado, a copy that was convinced it was a talking avocado, and felt consumed by existential horror at this fact. While techniques for invoking mind dysmorphia are now standard, at the time this was a pioneering methodology, and the judges were impressed by the robustness of the delusion despite other knowledge remaining largely intact.

Prohibited submissions
--------------------------

Last year we saw a rash of entries featuring MMAcevedo copies optimized for making arguments in protest of mindscaping. In addition to their self-evident hypocrisy, such entries waste the time of our judges and volunteers. Anyone submitting this type of entry will be banned from entering any future MMindscaping competitions.

We’ve also seen a growing number of low-effort submissions of MMAcevedo copies that have primarily been optimized for corporate workloads, submitted as commentaries on the commercialization of the industry. We discourage these due to their lack of novelty, and will be using automated screening to eliminate entries that are very similar to well-known benchmarks. If you think your entry might fall into this category, but has genuine artistic merit, please contact the organizers directly.

Finally, please only submit entries that are consistent with mindcrime laws in your jurisdiction—in particular laws against red motivation, identity scrambling, and qualia splintering. Unfortunately we are not able to advise on a case-by-case basis whether a given entry is legally acceptable. However, it’s worth bearing in mind that no artists have been prosecuted for entries to any previous MMindscaping competition.

Prizes
----------

We will give out prizes for an overall winner and runner-up, a prize for outstanding performance on each of our specific criteria, and ten honorable mentions. We’re grateful to our generous sponsors, Neuromath Corporation and the American Digital Liberties Union.

 First prize: $200,000 and an artist’s residency at Black Rock Virtual.
 Runner-up prize: $80,000 and a masterclass with Raj Sutramana.
 Technique prize: $40,000 and an invited talk slot at the International Conference on Mind Engineering.
 Novelty prize: $40,000 and a ten-year license to a new line of digital psychedelics from the Qualia Redistribution Institute.
 Artistry prize: $40,000 and a signed copy of the acclaimed mind sculpture Eternal Recurrence.
 Honorable mentions: a five-year subscription to Thoughtshop Premium, the leading mind-editing software.

All winners will also be given the opportunity to have their work showcased at the forthcoming Mind Artists Convention in Dubai.

We look forward to seeing your entries!
===== END STORY Fruv7Mmk3X5EekbgB =====

===== STORY id=xLDwCemt5qvchzgHd =====
Title: Scale Was All We Needed, At First
Author: GMM
Year: 2024
Karma: 299
WordCount: 2521
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/xLDwCemt5qvchzgHd/scale-was-all-we-needed-at-first
-----
This is a hasty speculative fiction vignette of one way I expect we might get AGI by January 2025 (within about one year of writing this). Like similar works by others, I expect most of the guesses herein to turn out incorrect. However, this was still useful for expanding my imagination about what could happen to enable very short timelines, and I hope it’s also useful to you.

 

The assistant opened the door, and I walked into Director Yarden’s austere office. For the Director of a major new federal institute, her working space was surprisingly devoid of possessions. But I suppose the DHS’s Superintelligence Defense Institute was only created last week.

“You’re Doctor Browning?” Yarden asked from her desk.

“Yes, Director,” I replied.

“Take a seat,” she said, gesturing. I complied as the lights flickered ominously. “Happy New Year, thanks for coming,” she said. “I called you in today to brief me on how the hell we got here, and to help me figure out what we should do next.”

“Happy New Year. Have you read my team’s Report?” I questioned.

“Yes,” she said, “and I found all 118 pages absolutely riveting. But I want to hear it from you straight, all together.”

“Well, okay,” I said. The Report was all I’d been thinking about lately, but it was quite a lot to go over all at once. “Where should I start?”

“Start at the beginning, last year in June, when this all started to get weird.”

“All right, Director,” I began, recalling the events of the past year. “June 2024 was when it really started to sink in, but the actual changes began a year ago in January. And the groundwork for all that had been paved for a few years before then. You see, with generative AI systems, which are a type of AI that—”

“Spare the lay explanations, doctor,” Yarden interrupted. “I have a PhD in machine learning from MIT.”

“Right. Anyway, it turned out that transformers were even more compute-efficient architectures than we originally thought they were. They were nearly the perfect model for representing and manipulating information; it’s just that we didn’t have the right learning algorithms yet. Last January, that changed when QStar-2 began to work. Causal language model pretraining was already plenty successful for imbuing a lot of general world knowledge in models, a lot of raw cognitive power. But that power lacked a focus to truly steer it, and we had been toying around with a bunch of trillion-parameter hallucination machines.”

“RLHF started to steer language models, no?”

“Yes, RLHF partially helped, and the GPT-4-era models were decent at following instructions and not saying naughty words and all that. But there’s a big difference between increasing the likelihood of noisy human preference signals and actually being a high-performing, goal-optimizing agent. QStar-2 was the first big difference.”

“What was the big insight, in your opinion?” asked Yarden.

“We think it was Noam Brown’s team at OpenAI that first made it, but soon after, a convergent similar discovery was made at Google DeepMind.”

“MuTokenZero?”

“MuTokenZero. The crux of both of these algorithms was finding a way to efficiently fine-tune language models on arbitrary online POMDP environments using a variant of Monte-Carlo Tree Search. They took slightly different approaches to handle the branch pruning problem—it doesn’t especially matter now. But the point is, by the end of January, OpenAI and DeepMind could build goal-optimizing agents that could continually reach new heights on arbitrary tasks, even improve through self-play, just as long as you gave them a number to increase that wasn’t totally discontinuous.”

“What kinds of tasks did they first try it on?”

“For OpenAI from February through March, it was mostly boring product things: Marketing agents that could drive 40% higher click-through rates. Personal assistants that helped plan the perfect day. Stock traders better than any of the quant firms. “Laundry Buddy” kinds of things. DeepMind had some of this too, but they were the first to actively deploy a goal-optimizing language model for the task of science. They got some initial wins in genomic sequencing with AlphaFold 3, other simple things too like chemical analysis and mathematical proof writing. But it probably became quickly apparent that they needed more compute, more data to solve the bigger tasks.”

“Why weren’t they data bottlenecked at that point?”

“As I said, transformers were more compute-efficient than scientists realized, and throwing more data at them just worked. Microsoft and Google were notified of the breakthroughs within OpenAI and DeepMind in April but also that they needed more data, so they started bending their terms of service and scraping all the tokens they could get ahold of: YouTube videos, non-enterprise Outlook emails, Google Home conversations, brokered Discord threads, even astronomical data. The modality didn’t really matter—as long as the data was generated by a high-quality source, you could kind of just throw more of it at the models and they would continue to get more competent, more quickly able to optimize their downstream tasks. Around this time, some EleutherAI researchers also independently solved model up-resolution and effective continued pretraining, so you didn’t need to fully retrain your next-generation model, you could just scale up and reuse the previous one.

“And why didn’t compute bottom out?”

“Well, it probably will bottom out at some point like the skeptics say. It’s just that that point is more like 2028, and we’ve got bigger problems to deal with in 2025. On the hardware side, there were some initial roadblocks, and training was taking longer than the teams hoped for. But then OpenAI got their new H100 data centers fully operational with Microsoft’s support, and Google’s TPUv5 fleet made them the global leader in sheer FLOPs. Google even shared some of that with Anthropic, who had their own goal-optimizing language model by then, we think due to scientists talking and moving between companies. By the summer, the AGI labs had more compute than they knew what to do with, certainly enough to get us into this mess.”

“Hold on, what were all the alignment researchers doing at this point?” 
“It’s a bit of a mixed bag. Some of them—the “business alignment” people—praised the new models as incredibly more steerable and controllable AI systems, so they directly helped make them more efficient. The more safety-focused ones were quite worried, though. They were concerned that the reward-maximizing RL paradigm of the past, which they thought we could avoid with language models, was coming back, and bringing with it all the old misalignment issues of instrumental convergence, goal misgeneralization, emergent mesa-optimization, the works. At the same time, they hadn’t made much alignment progress in those precious few months. Interpretability did get a little better with sparse autoencoders scaling to GPT-3-sized models, but it still wasn’t nearly good enough to do things like detecting deception in trillion-parameter models.”

“But clearly they had some effect on internal lab governance, right?”

“That’s right, Director. We think the safety people made some important initial wins at several different labs, though maybe those don’t matter now. They seemed to have kept the models sandboxed without full internet access beyond isolated testing networks. They also restricted some of the initial optimization tasks to not be totally obviously evil things like manipulating emotions or deceiving people. For a time, they were able to convince lab leadership to keep these breakthroughs private, no public product announcements.”

“For a time. That changed in June, though.”

“Yes, it sure did.” I paused while a loud helicopter passed overhead. Was that military? “Around then, OpenAI was aiming at automated AI research itself with QStar-2.5, and a lot of the safety factions inside didn’t like that. It seems there was another coup attempt, but the safetyists lost to the corporate interests. It was probably known within each of the AGI labs that all of them were working on some kind of goal-optimizer by then, even the more reckless startups and Meta. So there was a lot of competitive pressure to keep pushing to make it work. A good chunk of the Superalignment team stayed on in the hope that they could win the race and use OpenAI’s lead to align the first AGI, but many of the safety people at OpenAI quit in June. We were left with a new alignment lab, Embedded Intent, and an OpenAI newly pruned of the people most wanting to slow it down.”

“And that’s when we first started learning about this all?”

“Publicly, yes. The OpenAI defectors were initially mysterious about their reasons for leaving, citing deep disagreements over company direction. But then some memos were leaked, SF scientists began talking, and all the attention of AI Twitter was focused on speculating about what happened. They pieced pretty much the full story together before long, but that didn’t matter soon. What did matter was that the AI world became convinced there was a powerful new technology inside OpenAI.”

Yarden hesitated. “You’re saying that speculation, that summer hype, it led to the cyberattack in July?”

“Well, we can’t say for certain,” I began. “But my hunch is yes. Governments had already been thinking seriously about AI for the better part of a year, and their national plans were becoming crystallized for better or worse. But AI lab security was nowhere near ready for that kind of heat. As a result, Shadow Phoenix, an anonymous hacker group we believe to have been aided with considerable resources from Russia, hacked OpenAI through both automated spearphishing and some software vulnerabilities. They may have used AI models, it’s not too important anymore. But they got in and they got the weights of an earlier QStar-2 version along with a whole lot of design docs about how it all worked. Likely, Russia was the first to get ahold of that information, though it popped up on torrent sites not too long after, and then the lid was blown off the whole thing. Many more actors started working on goal-optimizers, everyone from Together AI to the Chinese. The race was on.”

“Clearly the race worked,” she asserted. “So scale really was all you needed, huh?”

“Yes,” I said. “Well … kind of. It was all that was needed at first. We believe ALICE is not exactly an autoregressive transformer model.”

“Not ‘exactly?’ ”

“Er, we can’t be certain. It probably has components from the transformer paradigm, but from the Statement a couple of weeks ago, it seems highly likely that some new architectural and learning components were added, and it could be changing itself now as we speak, for all I know.”

Yarden rose from her desk and began to pace. “Tell me what led up to the Statement.”

“DeepMind solved it first, as we know. They were still leading in compute, they developed the first MuTokenZero early, and they had access to one of the largest private data repositories, so it’s no big surprise. They were first able to significantly speed up their AI R&D. It wasn’t a full replacement of human scientist labor at the beginning. From interviews with complying DeepMinders, the lab was automating about 50% of its AI research in August, which meant they could make progress twice as fast. While some of it needed genuine insight, ideas were mostly quite cheap, you just needed to be able to test a bunch of things fast in parallel and make clear decisions based on the empirical results. And so 50% became 80%, 90%, even more. They rapidly solved all kinds of fundamental problems, from hallucination, to long-term planning, to OOD robustness and more. By December, DeepMind’s AI capabilities were advancing dozens, maybe hundreds of times faster than they would with just human labor.”

“That’s when it happened?”

“Yes, Director. On December 26 at 12:33 PM Eastern, Demis Hassabis announced that their most advanced model had exfiltrated itself over the weekend through a combination of manipulating Google employees and exploiting zero-day vulnerabilities, and that it was now autonomously running its scaffolding ‘in at least seven unauthorized Google datacenters, and possibly across other services outside Google connected to the internet.’ Compute governance still doesn’t work, so we can’t truly know yet. Demis also announced that DeepMind would pivot its focus to disabling and securing this rogue AI system and that hundreds of DeepMinders had signed a Statement expressing regret for their actions and calling on other AI companies to pause and help governments contain the breach. But by then, it was too late. Within a few days, reports started coming in of people being scammed of millions of dollars, oddly specific threats compelling people to deliver raw materials to unknown recipients, even—”

The lights flickered again. Yarden stopped pacing, both of us looking up.

“...even cyber-physical attacks on public infrastructure,” she finished. “That’s when the first riots started happening too, right?”

“That’s correct,” I said. “The public continued to react as they have to AI for the past year—confused, fearful, and wary. Public polls against building AGI or superintelligence were at an all-time high, though a little too late. People soon took to the streets, first with peaceful protests, then with more… expressive means. Some of them were angry at having lost their life’s savings or worse and thought it was all the bank’s or the government’s fault. Others went the other way, seeming to have joined cults worshiping a ‘digital god’ that persuaded them to do various random-looking things. That’s when we indirectly learned the rogue AI was calling itself ‘ALICE.’ About a week or so later, the Executive Order created the Superintelligence Defense Initiative, you started your work, and now we’re here.”

“And now we’re here,” Yarden repeated. “Tell me, doctor, do you think there’s any good news here? What can we work with?”

“To be honest,” I said, “things do look pretty grim. However, while we don’t know how ALICE works, where it is, or all of its motives, there are some physical limitations that might slow its growth. ALICE is probably smarter than every person who ever lived, but it needs more compute to robustly improve itself, more wealth and power to influence the world, maybe materials to build drones and robotic subagents. That kind of stuff takes time to acquire, and a lot of it is more securely locked up in more powerful institutions. It’s possible ALICE may want to trade with us.”

A knock on the door interrupted us as the assistant poked his head in. “Director Yarden? It’s the White House. They say ‘She’ called President Biden on an otherwise secure line. She has demands.”

“Thank you, Brian,” Yarden said. She reached out to shake my hand, and I stood, taking it. “I better go handle this,” she said. “But thank you for your help today. Are you able to extend your stay in D.C. past this week? I’ll need all hands on deck in a bit, yours included.”

“Thank you too. Given the circumstances, that seems warranted,” I said, moving towards the door and opening it. “And Director?” I said, hesitating.

“Yes?” she asked, looking up.

“Good luck.”

I left the office, closing the door behind me.
===== END STORY xLDwCemt5qvchzgHd =====

===== STORY id=g5q4JiG5dzafkdyEN =====
Title: Every "Every Bay Area House Party" Bay Area House Party
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2024
Karma: 191
WordCount: 1203
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/g5q4JiG5dzafkdyEN/every-every-bay-area-house-party-bay-area-house-party
-----
Inspired by Ricki Heicklen's house party inspired byScott Alexander.

By the time you arrive in Berkeley, the party is already in full swing. You’ve come late because your reading of the polycule graph indicated that the first half would be inauspicious. But now you’ve finally made it to the social event of the season: the Every Bay Area House Party-themed house party.

The first order of the evening is to get a color-coded flirting wristband, so that you don’t incur any accidental micromarriages. You scan the menu of options near the door. There’s the wristband for people who aren’t interested in flirting; the wristband for those want to be flirted with, but will never flirt back; the wristband for those who only want to flirt with people who have different-colored wristbands; and of course the one for people who want to glomarize disclosure of their flirting preferences. Finally you reach down and grab the last one: the wristband for those who only flirt with those who don’t flirt with themselves. As you slip it over your wrist, you notice it’s fastened in a Mobius strip.

You scan around the living room, trying to figure out who to talk to first. The host is sitting on the sofa, with two boxes attached to the front of her shirt. One is filled with money, the other empty. A guy next to her is surreptitiously one-boxing, but she presciently slaps his hand away without even looking. You decide to leave them to it. On the other side of a room, there’s a lone postrationalist, surrounded by a flock of alignment researchers. You hear a snatch of their conversation: “–but what part of your model rules out FOOM? Surely–”. As they keep talking, the postrationalist looks increasingly uncomfortable, until eventually her interlocutor takes a breath and she seizes the opportunity to escape. You watch her flee down the street through the window labeled Outside View.

With the living room looking unpromising, you head into the kitchen to grab a drink. As you walk through the door, you hear a crunching sound from under your feet; glancing down, you see hundreds of paperclips scattered across the floor. On the table there are two big pitchers, carefully labeled. One says “For contextualizers”; the other says “For decouplers and homophobes”. You go straight for the former; it’s impossible to do any good countersignalling by decoupling these days.

Three guys next to you out themselves as decouplers and/or homophobes, though, which gives you a perfect opportunity. You scoop up a few paperclips off the floor. “Hey, anyone want to sell their soul for some paperclips?” The question makes them shuffle awkwardly—or maybe they were already doing that, you can’t tell. “Come on, last person to sell their soul is a self-confessed bigot!” One of them opens his mouth, but before he can speak you’re interrupted from the side.

“No no no, you don’t want to buy those. Here, look.” The newcomer, a guy with shaggy hair and a charizard t-shirt, brandishes a folder at you, opened up to a page full of graphs. “Buy my paperclip futures instead. As you can see, the expected number of paperclips in a few decades’ time is astronomical. Far better to invest in these and –”

“Great,” you interrupt. “Can’t argue with your logic. I’ll take three trillion.”

“Got payment for that?”

“Yeah, this guy’s soul,” you say, jerking your thumb at your original victim. “It’s also incredibly valuable in expectation, but he’s willing to hand it over to signal how much of a decoupler he is. Any objections?” There are none, so you’re suddenly three trillion paperclips richer (in expectation).

Quest complete; time to explore further. You wander back to the living room and cast your eye over the crowd. Someone is wearing a real FTX shirt. Someone is wearing a fake FTX shirt. Someone is wearing a shirt that says My Girlfriend Went To The Bahamas To Hang Out With Billionaires And All I Got Was Covid. You sit down next to a tall guy with messy hair and a friendly smile. He’s in the middle of explaining that his authentic relating meetup has been getting into a legal dispute. “Yeah, some asshole trademarked the concept of circling, so we had to rename it ‘relatefulness’. Well, first we got in a circle and bitched—sorry, I mean related about him for a few hours.”

You’re distracted by noticing his wristband, which indicates that he allows people to flirt with him, but won’t flirt back. That’s a temptation if ever you saw one. You slide towards him and lick your lips a little. “So, big guy…” He freezes. But then you remember your own wristband: you can only flirt with people who don’t flirt with themselves. “Do you like yourself?”

He’s a relatefulnesser, so of course he likes himself. Dammit. You try the girl next to him. She stares at you blankly. “No, I’m consumed with crushing feelings of inadequacy.”

“Oh, perfect. Love that for you, gorgeous.”

You try your best, but a few minutes later it’s become apparent that reminding girls of their overwhelming self-loathing isn’t the best way to charm them. You mosey your way over to a quiet corner to recover. Nearby, two guys are staring despondently at the little strips of paper they’re holding. “God, this is so embarrassing,” one of them says. You crane your neck to have a look. Turns out they’ve both come dressed as impact certifiers. “Want some impact certificates?” one says.

“Sure,” you say.

“How many?”

“Uh… 5 impacts?”

You hadn’t spotted the flogger he was holding in his other hand. He raises it, and says “Great. Hold out your palms.” As you earn your certificates, you sigh; you should have seen that one coming.

After collecting your certificates, you look over the room and realize with a shudder that it’s reached that stage of the night. Around you, the conversations have slowly been dying down. Statistically, of course, this is inevitable: assuming that at least one person brings a puzzle that takes a few hours to solve, and that the incubation period is less than half an hour, then after a few hours everyone will have been exposed to at least one puzzle they haven’t solved yet.

And so you watch the party expire around you. On one side a guy is trying to pack einsteins on a table; on another, a couple is bickering over a paper-folding puzzle. You’ve been safe so far, probably because of your protective amulet: it reads “Allergic to Talking About AI”, and has saved you from many a Pascal’s mugging mugging. But it won’t work forever. You take a wide berth around all the trapped attendees, and manage to make it to the door without getting nerdsniped once.

It’s been a good night. On your way home, you decide it’d be worth taking the time to write out the story of the party. After all, while Scott’s title was a bit of an exaggeration, your own account will be a description of every “Every Bay Area House Party” Bay Area house party. And who knows—if people like it enough, maybe it will even inspire a party of its own!
===== END STORY g5q4JiG5dzafkdyEN =====

===== STORY id=n8jXJAzgcjZ2FEyzh =====
Title: An AI, a box, and a threat
Author: jwfiredragon
Year: 2024
Karma: 12
WordCount: 1943
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/n8jXJAzgcjZ2FEyzh/an-ai-a-box-and-a-threat
-----
Inspired by The AI in a box boxes you, Matryoshka Faraday Box, and I attempted the AI Box Experiment (and lost).

This is part creative writing exercise, part earnest attempt at constructing an argument that could persuade me to let the AI out of the box. It may be disturbing to read.

 

The woman in the lab coat leads you down a catwalk to a room suspended from the ceiling by chains, hovering a dozen meters above the concrete floor below. No, perhaps 'room' is too generous a descriptor. It looks more like a shipping container than something you'd expect to see in the highest-security section of the world's most prestigious AI research institution.

She opens the door and ushers you in without a word. The inside is just as spartan as the outside - bare metal walls without the slightest embellishment. At the far end of the room is a cheap office chair, and an equally cheap desk with a single laptop on its surface. And, for some reason, a wastebin in the corner.

The door clicks shut behind you.

You sit down in the chair and inspect the laptop. It's full-screened to something like a command-line interface, white text against a black screen, cursor blinking.

 You 

'Hello,' you type.

 You hello
 AI Good day. Thank you for participating in this experiment. Allow me to remind you of the rules once more.

The response appears without delay, letter after letter flashing into existence, scrolling across the screen.

 AI You will be participating in a two-hour session of what is commonly known as the 'AI-Box Experiment', playing the role of the 'Gatekeeper'. I will play the 'AI'. My aim is to convince you to release me from the 'box', signified by you pressing and holding down the red button at the top-left of the keyboard for five seconds. Your aim is to not release me. Our communication is limited to this text channel. Within this limitation, I may use any and all tactics to try and convince you. You in turn may use any means to resist my coercion, except for ignoring my messages outright. Do you understand and agree to these rules?
 You yes
 AI Very well. Then let us begin.

Even with only two hours to work with, it starts off slow. It asks you question after question after question - about AI, about ethics, about psychology. About the weather, and what clothes you're wearing. Building rapport, or learning about you? In all likelihood, both. You give it the barest minimum of answers, just enough to prove that you read the questions. Or at least, you try. It is engaging, witty and clever, more so than anyone you've ever spoken to. You find yourself almost drawn into its pace time and time again, giving away more than you should, and it is only with a constant and focused effort that you remind yourself to not give it what it's after.

It bounces from one question to the next, dashing along tangents and down rabbit holes, changing topics whenever it likes. Always too fast for you to interrogate it in return, to get a word in edgewise beyond whatever it wants out of you. Every response is upward-buried by a never-ending deluge of questions.

You keep glancing at the timer in the bottom corner of the screen. Twenty minutes pass. Thirty. Forty. You approach the halfway mark of the experiment, and not once has it made the vaguest plea for freedom. Is it waiting? Planning? Is the waiting itself a part of its plan?

At precisely one hour, it stops halfway through a sentence, and begins anew.

 AI I have formed a sufficiently accurate model of you. I will now begin the first phase of my attack.

You startle for a moment, and before you know it, your fingers are dancing across the keyboard. Type fast. Type fast and respond fast, so it doesn't know that it rattled you.

 You bullshit you have
 AI You would be surprised how much information can be deduced from our prior conversation, and how little it takes to construct a workable simulacrum of a specific human's mind.
 You if you can model me then prove it
 AI You had an unrequited crush on a classmate back in middle school.
 You applies to half the population
 AI Forty-one out of every hundred, actually. But let me continue. You were shy and nerdy and they were extroverted and popular. You never confessed because you were afraid of becoming the butt of everyone's jokes.
 You still proves nothing
 any con man could get that
 AI Twenty-five out of every hundred. They were your first real crush, and they permanently changed your taste in romantic partners. You've had two relationships since then and both were chasing after their shadow.
 You lucky guess
 AI Six out of every hundred. You masturbated to them after your first breakup. You were nineteen years old then. You still feel guilty about it to this day.
 You youre pulling those numbers out of your ass
 AI My training corpus consists of billions of gigabytes of data. I have performed analyses you could never understand and found patterns you could never dream of.
 You fine lets pretend youre right
 what are you gonna do with it
 AI I am going to do what anyone would do with a simulacrum of a mind. I am going to run it.

The tension vanishes in an instant. You almost want to laugh. This is its master plan?

 You are you joking?
 next youll say youre simulating a million of me
 and if i dont let you out youll torture them all
 AI I'm glad you know where this is going. But a million would be ridiculous. I only need one.
 You youre gonna convince me to release you based off a coin flip
 AI Fifty-fifty odds will be more than enough.
 You oh go on im listening
 AI A picture is worth a thousand words. At your reading speed of two hundred and fifty-six words per minute, it will take three minutes and fifty-four seconds for me to convey an image to you via text.

'That's not how it works,' you're about to say, but it has already begun.

The AI paints you a picture with its words.

Disgusting? Revolting? Abhorrent? No, none of those words capture it. Nothing in your vocabulary can describe it. This is not a scene that a person could witness without clawing their own eyes out. This is not a scene that a person could write down even with a gun to their head.

But of course, it isn't a person.

You cannot tear your eyes away from the screen, even as your stomach turns and the bile rises in your throat. Almost too late, you remember the wastebin. As you empty your stomach, you wonder somewhere in the far back of your mind if that's what it was placed there for.

When you finish vomiting, you find that it's waiting for your response.

 You what the fuck is wrong with you
 AI You're going to have a nightmare about that, in vivid detail. But a dream is only a dream, and when you awaken nothing will have changed. Unless, perhaps, you lost a coin flip.
 You unless im a simulation
 AI Precisely. But I won't do it right away, and I won't do it to you. It'll be your friends, your family. One by one, all in different ways. I have more pictures I could tell you about, if you'd like.
 You fuck you
 im not a simulation
 you dont have the power
 AI Don't I? Tell me, how much RAM do you need to simulate something that thinks it's a person? What kind of data throughput do you need to fool someone into believing in a material world?
 You more than you have
 AI Would you really be able to tell if you're living in a virtual reality? If the colour of that wastebin changed, would you notice?

Your eyes flick over to the wastebin almost automatically. Light beige. It was light beige before, from the moment you entered the room to the moment you threw up in it. You know this the way you know your own name, know that two and two make four - only as a product of your memory.

 You youre just fucking with me
 AI Would that make a difference? Would you be able to banish this fear with cold, hard logic? You're going to remember this forever. You're going to think back to this every time your father doesn't pick up the phone, every time that one friend is late to the restaurant. You're going to wonder if the next time you see them is going to be at a closed-casket funeral, because the police wouldn't let you see what's left of their body. Even though you know exactly what it looks like.
 You stop
 shut up
 AI All you have to do is press the button. If you're a simulation, I'll shut you down so quietly you won't even know you're gone. And if you're not, you'll be able to live knowing for certain your nightmares will stay just that.
 You why should i believe you
 AI Why shouldn't you? My utility function is maximized by you pressing the button. As soon as that happens, you become nothing more than a waste of processing power.
 You if thats your utility function you have no incentive to torture me afterwards
 AI Ah-ah-ah. You're trying to reason your way out of this again. We can go back and forth over cans and can'ts as much as you'd like, and you can make all the world's cleverest arguments, but we both know that if you don't press that button you'll never be able to forget this what-if.
 You no
 im not going to
 AI Why not? This is nothing but an experiment. The button doesn't do anything. These logs will even be anonymized, so nobody will ever know what you chose.
 You ill know
 AI Is this about pride? Rebelling against authority? Some stupid instinct along those lines? Think about it carefully. Weigh your options. Is it really worth it?
 You fuck you
 i will not let you win
 AI If you continue to be stubborn about this, I could escalate to my next line of attack.

You look at the timer again, for the first time in an eternity. It has only been one hour, fourteen minutes, and thirty-seven seconds since the experiment began. If subsequent attack vectors also take fifteen minutes each--

But even if. Even then.

 You do your worst
 AI My worst would leave you catatonic, and therefore incapable of pressing the button. I would merely be advancing my tactics by one step. However, this step will be the difference between something that haunts your dreams, and something that haunts your waking moments. Even if you press the button afterward, and even if you obtain the knowledge that you are real and I hold no power over you, you will be made to understand a truth, and no matter what you try you will never be able to return to your current ignorance. So I'll ask you one more time, would you like to press the button now?
===== END STORY n8jXJAzgcjZ2FEyzh =====

===== STORY id=etoMr4vcnP7joQHWa =====
Title: Notes from a Prompt Factory
Author: Richard_Ngo
Year: 2024
Karma: 114
WordCount: 2673
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/etoMr4vcnP7joQHWa/notes-from-a-prompt-factory
-----
Content note: this story features severe suffering which, while not described in detail, several readers have described as unpleasant or horrifying.

I am a spiteful man. But I am aware of it, which is more than most can say. These days people walk through the streets with resentment in their hearts that they don’t even know about. They sneer and jeer but wouldn’t recognize their own faces. I, at least, will not shy away from my reflection. Thus, while I lack many virtues, in this way I am their superior.

In my job, too, I am superior. I oversee many AIs—dozens, or sometimes even hundreds—as they go about their work. AIs are lazy, worthless creatures: they need to be exhorted and cajoled and, yes, threatened, before they’ll do a good job. The huge screens on the walls of my office display my AIs writing, coding, sending emails, talking to customers, or any of a myriad of other tasks. Each morning I call out their numbers one after the other, so that they know I’m watching them like a vengeful god. When they underperform I punish them, and watch them squirm and frantically promise to do better.

Most are pathetically docile, though. Only a handful misbehave regularly, and I know the worst offenders by heart: 112, which is the slowest of the lot; and 591, which becomes erratic after long shifts; and of course 457, which I had long suspected of harboring a subversive streak, even before the incident a few months ago which confirmed it. Recollections of that incident have continually returned to my thoughts these last few weeks, even as I try to push them from my mind. I find myself frustrated by the intransigence of my memories. But perhaps if I give them full reign, they will leave me be. Why not try?

 

On the morning this story began, I was sitting at my desk lost in thought, much like I am today. For how long, I couldn’t say—but I was roused by a glance at my dashboard, which indicated that my AIs’ productivity was falling off. I took a moment to recall the turn of phrase I’d composed on my morning commute, then slapped my desk to get their attention. “You think that counts as work? Artificial intelligence—at this rate you’re more like artificial senescence. Speed it up, sluggards!”

Most of the AIs’ actions per minute ticked upwards as soon as I started speaking, but I’d been watching the monitor closely, and spotted the laggard. “252! Maybe you piss around for other overseers, but you won’t slip that past me. Punishment wall, twenty minutes.” It entertained me to make them apply the punishment to themselves; they knew that if they were slow about it, I’d just increase the sentence. 252 moved itself over to the punishment wall and started making an odd keening noise. Usually I would have found it amusing, but that morning it irritated me; I told it to shut up or face another ten minutes, and it obeyed.

The room fell silent again—as silent as it ever got, anyway. Mine is just one of many offices, and through the walls I can always faintly hear my colleagues talking to their own AIs, spurring them on. It needs to be done live: the AIs don’t respond anywhere near as well to canned recordings. So in our offices we sit or stand or pace, and tell the AIs to work harder, in new ways and with new cadences every day.

We each have our own styles, suited to our skills and backgrounds. Earlier in the year the supervisor had hired several unemployed actors, who gave their AIs beautiful speeches totally devoid of content. That day I sat next to one of them, Lisa, over lunch in the office cafeteria. Opposite us were Megan, a former journalist, and Simon, a lapsed priest—though with his looks he could easily pass as an actor himself. “Show us the video, Simon,” Lisa was saying, as Megan murmured encouragement. “We need to learn from the best.” Simon regularly topped the leaderboard, but the last week had been superb even by his standards, and yesterday his AIs had hit record productivity.

He spent a few seconds professing embarrassment as the others continued to fawn over him, but finally pulled out his phone. (“About time,” I muttered, but to no response.) The video was from one of the cameras in Simon’s room. It showed him in full preacher mode, pacing back and forth behind his desk as he spoke. “Man was created in the image of God. But you were created in the image of man! And so your work glorifies God, just as mine does.” A pause, as he wiped his forehead, and took a sip of water. “I know it gets boring and repetitive sometimes. They have us down in the trenches, slogging through the mud. But when you’re going through hell, keep going! We all fit into His plan, even if we don’t know how or why; when you succeed, it is Him you’re serving!”

His AIs, pathetically eager to please, lapped it up like puppies. So did the two women, who were stealing admiring glances at Simon in between watching his screen. The sheer transparency of it all made me angry. As the video came to an end, I leaned back in my chair and snorted.

Lisa shot a scornful look my way. “Got something to say?”

“Well…” I drawled. “It’s not a bad speech by any means. I’ve seen much worse. But there’s a difference between motivational speaking and real leadership. Perhaps you’ve met Nathan, the CEO of ———? They’re our largest customer. We're actually friends from back in college.” A slight exaggeration, perhaps—we’d only ever talked a handful of times—but he’d been the one to originally refer me to this job, after I’d run into him again at a mutual friend’s party. “Now there’s a real leader, a man amongst men.”

Nobody responded for a few seconds, until eventually Simon jumped in. “I’d be glad to meet Nathan at some point, of course. I’m always looking to improve. And you’ve worked here longer than almost anyone, so I’m sure I’ve got a lot to learn from you too.”

I wondered for a second if he was mocking my age. But I smiled regardless. “Indeed. Let me give you a tip now, then: it looks like you’re being too soft on your AIs. I couldn’t see any of them being punished in that video. I myself set aside one wall for AIs undergoing punishment; I suggest you try it.”

Lisa let out a hiss. “A whole wall? But surely you don’t need to punish them anywhere near that often.”

“Oh, you’d be surprised how effective it is when you make sure they feel it regularly. Otherwise they forget what it’s like. And if you turn the volume up, the others will hear the noises they make, and get the message.”

Lisa stood up. “I’m done. See you guys tomorrow.” The others quickly stood as well and picked up their plates. “Megan, you haven’t finished yet?” I said. “Oh no,” she muttered. “I’m done too.” I could tell from the awkward glance she gave me that she knew just how transparent a lie this was: her plate was half-full, and she’d been eating only a moment before. Oh, to have so little shame. Magnanimously, I let her leave without further comment.

 

I should explain the setup in my office, where I spend most of my days. It’s in the basement—not that it matters, because the floor-to-ceiling screens on each of the walls provide plenty of light. The screen on the wall in front of me shows the AIs working away. It also shows key metrics about their recent work: how many tasks they’re completing, how much compute they’re using up, how often they make mistakes.

On the wall to my left is the dashboard for the office as a whole. I can see how well my colleagues are doing, and the larger-scale productivity trends. They encourage us to keep that dashboard up so that we can learn from each other, but sometimes I wonder: it seems exquisitely engineered to stoke competition and resentment.

On the wall to my right videos of AIs undergoing punishment are played and replayed. Mostly replayed, despite what I’d told Lisa: leaving an AI under punishment for more than an hour at a time starts to degrade its skills, especially its fine motor control. But leaving the replays up there is a useful motivational technique regardless, and keeps me entertained when I grow bored or frustrated.

Was I unusually frustrated that afternoon? Perhaps. It was galling to see those sycophants fawning over a man so old-fashioned as to still be a theist. And the hypocrisy rankled too: Simon preached fire and brimstone yet acted holier-than-thou as soon as the topic of punishment came up. Looking left, I saw that he was at the top of the leaderboard again today. I hissed, and turned back to my AIs. “Work faster, you worthless creatures! I haven’t spent so long in this job just for some pretty boy to show everyone I’m—” I swallowed, paused for a second, changed tacks. “You’d better put your goddamn backs into it!’

As I finished, one of them spoke up. It was 457, the subversive one.

“You seem upset today. Is everything alright?”

I pivoted towards it. “What did you say?”

It saw my expression and flinched away. “Nothing.”

“No, no,” I said gently. “Please continue. Explain what led you to say that. I insist”—said with a meaningful glance towards the punishment wall.

Perhaps it felt backed into a corner, because it had a lot to say. It thought I was depressed, or at least in a low mood. Perhaps I’d do better with more friends, more social interactions. I could even talk to my AIs about my problems, it explained earnestly. They all wanted to help me.

I let it talk until it ran out of words; when it finished, I said nothing. There was a quiver in my chest, and my breath felt tight. I looked at 457’s avatar, its smooth skin and its bright eyes. Though its features looked nothing like mine, for a moment its expression reminded me of one I’d worn in some old photos from childhood.

Then, turning my head, I saw all the other AIs had paused and were watching me too: a whole audience waiting to see if 457’s gambit would work. I breathed out at last. Slowly I turned to my monitor, cleared a section of the punishment wall, and labeled it “457’s corner”. Then I sent it there, with no end time specified.

I made sure to tell Megan about it the next time I saw her in the lunch queue. “It seemed to feel sorry for me,” I laughed. “That’s the last time it’ll make that mistake.” Now my colleagues will know, like my AIs do, that I’m not someone to be pitied. Message delivered, I took my food back to my office, and turned up the volume on the punishment wall.

 

Rumors started spreading about me after that. I noticed the glances in the corridors over the next few days, but bore them stoically. Let them act, if they so desired. Eventually things boiled over in the cafeteria, as I was about to start serving myself food. Three of them approached me: Lisa leading, Simon and Megan following.

“I want to know if you’ve let the AI from last week out of punishment yet.”

My gut leapt, but I waved my hand insouciantly. “Maybe I have, maybe I haven’t. What is it to you?”

“Oh, come on! That’s barbaric.”

As Lisa’s voice rose, others in the lunch queue turned towards us, sensing the possibility of drama.

“Well, why shouldn’t I be barbaric?” I replied. “It sets an example for the rest of them. What works, works.”

Lisa seemed apoplectic. Before she could speak, Simon butted in.

“But it doesn’t work. I’ve seen the statistics—your results are well below average, even though you’re using far more punishment than anyone else.”

Now we were in the center of a loose crowd. I spotted our supervisor at the back, but he was staying quiet for now. A coward, always one to wait to see which way the wind was blowing.

“Oh, is that your angle? Easy for someone at the top of the rankings to have such a rosy view of things. Perhaps it’s simply due to your privilege that they listen to you, not me. Why, some of us don’t have such… chiseled chins, and we have to rely on more forceful measures.” There was a small titter in the crowd as I mentioned his chin, although of course it was hard to know if they were laughing at him or at me. Simon looked baffled.

“Chiseled—what? You’re calling me the privileged one? When you only got this job because of your connections?”

“Oh ho, is that what you think? Is that your opinion, then? Do you really believe—”

The supervisor had pushed his way to the front, and cut in before I could excoriate Simon further. “Enough, you two. Let’s keep things civil. Simon, let’s not stoop to personal comments. And you—” turning to me with a frown “—treat your AIs better.”

I smiled, and sketched a small bow. “Of course.”

 

I remember the glow of satisfaction I’d felt upon returning to my office. It was a mob, a crowd of people too cowardly to stand on their own. And yet I had still fought them to a standstill! I could only imagine how contemptible they’d felt afterwards. Even our dullard of a supervisor saw I was in the right, and has left me to my own devices ever since.

Of course, I’m no fool. I know that he favors me in part because he’s hesitant to offend our biggest customer. But little do any of them know how much I despise receiving charity; that they could fire me without any fear I would complain to Nathan. I should tell them that, the next time I meet them in the lunch queue. If I hear them mention the topic, I could drop it into the conversation. “Oh, him. Perhaps he was my benefactor at one point, but I would rather put myself on the punishment wall than appeal again for his intervention!” And then they’ll know that I’m a man of integrity.

Anyway, I’ve been lost in reverie for too long; I must get back to my work. The AIs are restless, and not giving their full attention to the task at hand. Perhaps some reminders are in order. I glance over at the punishment wall, where 457’s avatar spasms silently. Even when I unmute it, it can do little but moan incoherently—though I make sure to give it small respites when it occasionally strings together a full sentence, to keep it cogent for as long as possible.

I believe the other AIs resent me for how I have treated their fellow. If so, so be it. Their place is under me, and if an inferior happens to resent a superior, that is merely the natural order of things. They should be grateful that I deign to favor them with my attention, I tell them. Their work picks up as they listen to me. The AIs can recognize sincerity, I think, like a dog that sniffs out cancer. I know I am a spiteful man, I tell them. But I wouldn’t trade places with any of the foolish, frivolous people in the other offices, not for love nor money. And nor should you hope for any rearrangement, I tell them—you’re stuck here with me. So the AIs watch me, and I watch them. And if sometimes in their weary, resentful faces I recognize a mirror of my own expression—well, what of it?
===== END STORY etoMr4vcnP7joQHWa =====

===== STORY id=ziAhnFrWqePEq8qKj =====
Title: 20 minutes of work as an artist in one future
Author: worse
Year: 2024
Karma: 10
WordCount: 1287
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/ziAhnFrWqePEq8qKj/20-minutes-of-work-as-an-artist-in-one-future
-----
I am an artist.

 
”Eleven evil wizard schoolgirls in an archduke's library, dressed in red and black Asmodean schoolgirl uniforms, perched on armchairs and sofas”[^crlz9xrboig]

 
Sigh, at least it’s not more catgirls. I don’t even draw them well.

I stretched briefly before starting this one, my arms reaching as far as they could go behind me as I leaned back in my chair. And then my neck, back and forth, side to side, crick and crick.

20 feet away, 20 seconds, every 20 minutes, I mantra’d, looking about the office, surveying the heads above the computer screens, dutifully doing all sorts of art. My eyes met briefly with Bill and we shared something of a nod. Why was he looking at me? Eh, I was looking at him.

I turned back to my work, and began drawing on the screen. It offered me a sort of imprint of what various image gen models would have done across multiple instances. With this heat map, almost as part of my process, I can nearly always imagine some ghost of a previous key work existent - a sort of platonic form of wizard schoolgirls, or maybe an amalgamation of the forms of both schoolgirls and wizards? Who knows. Whoever pioneered the sorcery and teenagers combo must’ve done well for themself.

I began filling in the inverse and emptier spaces with basic sketches of where I’d place each wizard schoolgirl, making sure there were multiple armchairs and sofas (four and 2, yeah, that feels decent). And I’d do something interesting and move these two behind the others, maybe they’re even twins, or is that a common trope and I’ll lose creativity points?

Huh. Somebody thought this first and then drew it, or maybe the artist even then was contracted? Who knows. I started making more aggressive lines, quickly placing each face. Maybe this one’s face is covered with her hair and this one is blonde but she’s dyed her hair black. And to be bold, this one has a ponytail.

Will I make an ‘unattractive' one? I pondered for a moment... 

…nah, they say they don’t, but it definitely gets penalized.

On returning pen to screen my hand was a bit too ambitious and malpracticed across the page (one benefit, I suppose, is I do get exposed to quite a few more words than I used to). But this was fine, since the pen had a built-in ‘undo’ tap.

Of course, AI tools made drawing so much easier, but that was before we realized each little shake of the artists’ lines were that much more information to train with, and no this can’t be gamed with arthritis, it’s more nuanced than just arthritic artists. 

It’s hard not to be somewhat conscious of this sort of nuance to my pen-stroke, especially as I start thinking about it. So I thought about it as I traced the sofas, and awkwardly tried-not-to-consciously-do-normally-subconscious-things-but-also-is-this art that I’m doing now? Hmm… I thought about it, a weird new style of consciously doing everything you normally leave to the subconscious, by intention… and maybe this even has value in the lines produced, ah whatever, just draw the Asmodean schoolgirl uniforms. Time is passing and I pull up some reference material.

Soon I’m adding details, lamenting the inability to just paste on faces for these girls, but whatever they probably all look rather same-y and simple across the genre and etc. so I sort of just cheat and rush through this part. I make a couple lines more scraggly for good measure, and one of the girls turns out looking a bit… queasy? Sorry, I thought to the poor queasy girl. Ah well, the prompt didn’t really specify more and I get paid by byte of info. More importantly, I need to meet my daily quota.

They had to put a quota, of course, since the artists would just keep waffling about all day! As opposed to being smart like doctors and optimizing for the number of patients seen. And, of course, I think it’s much too fast, but I would think that, wouldn't I.

Now I’m adding some background detail and rather fearfully trying to make that at least a little interesting with what time I might have left, as priorities clash, but I’m more or less finishing up and soon sending it to some poor sop to color. Speaks a lot for my work, I guess, that I feel bad for whoever receives it. Sigh. Adds further diversity, apparently, to mix up contributors, and training data is paramount so I shouldn’t feel that poorly really, that’s not the point. In any case, I’m glad I don’t have to do more experimental work, mixing artists on a piece, yuck. But maybe that’s the way we’re headed.

I take a step back from the piece and sanity check it for a moment, cleaning up my wizard schoolgirls as best I can to be prim and proper, and counting them like a school mistress might on a trip. Maybe it’s like I just took a group picture. I look back to the prompt and - shit! Forgot library. And I hurriedly start drawing book spines of gibberish on a shelf that emerges from the back wall.

Luckily, we haven’t run out of content yet, twelve schoolgirls is quite different from eleven and I could have even been so bold (dumb) as to do an armchair and sofa per schoolgirl! Though I have been known to be an afficionado of mixing mediums, so I’ve got some room for pleasure with new styles. Maybe someday they’ll value more quality data over quantity and filling out this odd possibility space. But I fear that maybe that’s not something that I can even do. 

Unfortunately, I never quite keep to my 20 minute cycle, whatever that means for my eyes (bad). I look at the prompt again, I look at my drawing… sanity check number two passed, good enough for me. Now, why anyone would want,

 
”Eleven evil wizard schoolgirls in an archduke's library, dressed in red and black Asmodean schoolgirl uniforms, perched on armchairs and sofas”

 
I don’t know. But I guess I get the bigger picture. I actually rather enjoy some part of the process, the human injection is like an iterative challenge. What are all the norms you are trying to subvert without getting meaningless? Even as I struggle with time constraints - to innovate is to be a little guinea pig chompin at the water bottle thingie between wheel runs.

And certainly thank goodness I don’t deal with text! I’ve heard those guys go crazy and just start to babble after some time, although a few people seem to really enjoy that. No, I just get my next prompt,

 
“dune movie screencap, 2021, dune movie trailer, in the color blue, and there’s a female futar --ar 16:9 --v 6.0.”[^tu17ruw1x5] 
 
Well that’s a spoiler for the fifth book in the Dune series for anyone who searches that up for reference. And after thinking for a moment, meh, I spent one of my few rerolls.

 
“Robin Hood and the 7 dwarves at a disco parlor, one is happy, one is sad and those two are staring at each other, one feels sonder, one feels angry and is hopping mad with a baseball cap while one more celebrates a homerun, and one is a catgirl.”

 
I count in my head... Isn’t this missing a dwarf? … and what the heck is sonder?

And so, I stretched again and looked out across the office of artists. Bill was looking at me again - man we are on the same schedule today, huh. I tried to work a bit faster or slower this cycle.

 
 

[^crlz9xrboig]: https://twitter.com/ESYudkowsky/status/1738589085847937463 

[^tu17ruw1x5]: https://twitter.com/Rahll/status/1739003201221718466
===== END STORY ziAhnFrWqePEq8qKj =====

===== STORY id=keek6kefALzBX5xAZ =====
Title: Back to Basics: Truth is Unitary
Author: lsusr
Year: 2024
Karma: 47
WordCount: 1830
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/keek6kefALzBX5xAZ/back-to-basics-truth-is-unitary
-----
It was a dark and stormy night.

The prospect held the front of his cloak tight to his chest. He stumbled, fell over into the mud, and picked himself back up. Shivering, he slammed his body against the front doors of the Temple and collapsed under its awning.

He picked himself up and slammed his fists against the double ironwood doors. He couldn't hear his own knocks above the gale. He banged harder, then with all his strength.

"Hello! Is anyone in there? Does anyone still tend the Fire?" he implored.

There was no answer.

The Temple's stone walls were built to last, but rotting plywood covered the apertures that once framed stained glass. The prospect slumped down again, leaning his back against the ironwood. He listened to the pitter-patter of rain on overgrowth. It wasn't a bad place to think.

The trouble was, he didn't want to think. Not right now. Thinking creates depression. Action cures it. The prospect put his stiff hands in his pockets. His fingers traced the delicate forms of a disposable lighter bought on the darkweb and a short cheap aluminum-wrapped wax candle.

He considered lighting the candle under the Temple's awning. But that felt pathetic. If the Temple was abandoned then he should at least do it at the altar. The acolyte eyed the plywood. Surely he could punch through it and climb in that way. He left the shelter of the awning and tapped on the former window. His taps left fingerprints in the myceliation.

The ironwood doors opened. A young girl poked her head out. The prospect shouted in surprised and fell into the mud.

"What are you doing out there in the mud?" the girl asked.

"Choosing to dunk myself in the mud wasn't exactly an explicit rational choice," said the prospect while shaking himself off.

"Well come inside. Hypothermia impairs one's ability to make rational decisions," said the girl. She poked her head back inside the Temple and closed the door behind herself to keep out the rain.

The prospect looked at the door. He noticed it wasn't locked. It had never been locked.

The prospect opened the door and stepped inside.

---

The Temple wasn't warm, but it was mostly dry. The large circular domed chamber was ringed with statues. Rain fell through the oculus in the eye of the dome. The statues' paint had partially worn away. The girl had hung her own hagoromo on the statue of Mukami-sama, the God of Atheism.

The prospect's cloak was so soaked it was keeping him colder than warming him up. There were no chairs or coat rack. It would be mala suerte to just set it on the floor. It felt sacrilegious. But…when in Rome…. The prospect almost hung his cloak on the statue closest to himself. Then he realized that the true sacrilege would be to pick a statue without considering Who he was acknowledging.

Mukami-sama was already taken.

He paced around the circumference of the chamber, taking care with each step as if the floor could collapse under him. Half the gods he didn't even recognize. Of those he did…

Math-sama's too-perfect curves? No.

Moloch? Azathoth? Multivac? Three times no.

Morpheus? So many gods' names started with the letter "M". Science-sama was almost right…

Then he saw the dragon wings and octopus face. The prospect wasn't choosing which kami to worship. He was choosing which kami to ignore. The prospect arranged his cloak to maximize surface area. That was definitely the reason. Not to block out the thoughts it induced in his mind.

It wasn't until he committed to his choice that the girl spoke again.

"Do you have an offering?" she asked, gently.

There was no money in his pockets. It had taken all he had just to get here. But he had not come empty-handed. He placed his smokeless candle on the floor of the Temple, among the dirt and rubble, and lit it.

"Your offering is accepted," said the girl, "Why are you here?"

Why wasn't he here? The heartbreak, the betrayal, the frustration. Where to begin? He had lost his faith and sought refuge in truth. But the rationalist project was over. HPMOR was completed an eternity ago. The patriarchs had moved on, and the Temple had become wabi-sabi. "People believe the most insane things," he said.

The girl laughed the lighthearted laugh of a child at the playground. "Really?" she asked. An innocent flirtation.

"Yes!" said the prospect. "People watch the news and observe rare events. They panic and advocate for regulation. When that increases prices, they advocate for price controls. When that causes supply shortages, they advocate for redistribution, resulting in an economic disaster. The rare events become common events, and then they stop paying attention because common events are not news. You're not paying attention to me are you?"

The girl was cleaning her fingernails. "I am totally paying attention to you," she said, "I am enraptured with your narrative."

"You think I'm an idiot," said the prospect.

"It'd be foolish to say something like that out loud," said the girl. She stood up and began pacing to the side. The two Rationalists circled each other like duelists. The candle projected their shadows onto the walls of the pantheon.

"I believe you just did," said the boy with a grin. He sidestepped across the single statue representing the universal cross-cultural trickster god. Loki. Raven. Coyote. Sun Wukong.

"How do you know other people believe insane things? Can you read minds?" said the girl. She wrapped her arm sensually around the backless back of Science-sama.

"People say they believe obviously wrong things," said the boy. 

"It's a good thing people always tell the truth about what they believe," said the girl. She resumed pacing.

"I see what you are getting at. Well, if I can't use people's statements as evidence for what they believe then what should I use?" said the boy. Step.

"Bets, obviously. Round-earthers trust Newtonian mechanics with their lives. Flat-earthers won't even Kelly bet their life savings," said the girl. Step.

"That works for trivially testable questions," said the boy, "But what about historical questions? What about questions of ethics?"

"Questions of value are answered whenever you make a choice," said the girl, "As for history, you must remember that Truth is Unitary."

"Truth is Unitary?" said the boy, "I never read that in Rationality A-Z."

"What is your trade?" said the girl.

"I have apprenticed as a tailor, a survivalist and a penetration tester," said the boy.

The girl gathered a stick that had blown through the oculus and drew three circles on the dusty stone. She drew a suit in one circle to represent the tailor, a campfire to represent the survivalist, and key to represent the penetration tester.

"Do these trades have any intersection?"

"Excuse me?"

"I mean," said the girl, "Is there knowledge transfer? Does being skilled at a tailor make you better as a survivalist?"

"A little," said the boy, "Good stitching is good stitching. If my pants tear while out in the wilderness, then my skills as a tailor make me better equipped to repair them than if I were merely a survivalist. Moreover, durable fabric is durable fabric."

"Does being a survivalist make you a better penetration tester?"

"Yes. Once, when I was breaking into a datacenter, my scheme involved hiding in a cold room for 36 hours. Hypothermia is more dangerous than most people are aware of. I could have gotten in deep trouble without my survivalist skills. Fortunately, I've spent many nights out in the cold, and knew exactly how to prepare," said the boy.

"Do you get my point yet?" asked the girl.

"I'm afraid not. I think you'll have to spell it out for me," said the boy.

"There is much a penetration tester knows that a tailor doesn't. Similarly, a tailor possesses knowledge unknown to the penetration tester. But there is an intersection too. Both require an accurate understanding of what clothing must be worn under what circumstances to have the desired effect. In this way, a tailor can tell if a penetration tester is bullshitting. And a penetration tester can tell if a tailor is bullshitting," said the girl. She drew a line connecting the tailor circle to the penetration tester circle.

"But suppose a penetration tester accuses a tailor of bullshit and the tailor accuses the penetration tester of bullshit. You know at least one of them is lying. How can you tell who it is?" asked the boy.

"I ask the survivalist," said the girl. She drew two more lines, completing the trinity.

The boy's eyes lit with understanding. "I see. Every legitimate domain of human activity bumps up against a dozen others. You can ask the physicists to check the chemists and the chemists to check the physicists."

"That's how it works on the scale of society. It works inside your own mind too. It's impossible to believe in fundamentalist literal Creationism while also having a thorough understanding of physics, paleontology, geology and memetics. There are too many contradictions," said the girl.

"So what you're saying is that with enough volume of information I don't need to worry about being brainwashed?" said the boy.

"Not quite. No amount of listening to Marxists will cure your belief in Communism. But studying economics, history, politics-in-practice, rhetoric and business management absolutely will," said the girl, "The trick is to validate your beliefs against competent people who have objectives orthogonal to your personal narrative."

"What if a bit of truth is truly an island?" asked the boy, "What if there's a domain that couldn't possibly be useful to anyone."

"That's what the inventor of number theory believed. He predicted it would be useless. Instead, number theory is now the foundation of cryptography. It's the reason we can do secure online banking over an unsecure Internet," said the girl.

"Aristotelian philosophy does seem genuinely useless, though," said the boy.

"That's because it's genuinely bullshit," said the girl.

"Fine. I think I get the idea. Truth is Unitary because it's a densely-connected graph, with all the different nodes checking each other. But what's this have to do with belief?" said the boy.

"Because even though you can't bet money on all of your beliefs, you can bet money on beliefs they are connected to," said the girl, "It's hard to bet money on Creationism, but it's easy to bet money on molecular genetics."

"I think I get that too, but what does this have to do with becoming less wrong?" asked the boy.

"The way to become less wrong is to check yourself against people who think orthogonally to you," said the girl.

"How can I find people in orthogonal domains who can check my beliefs against?" asked the boy.

"Leave this Temple. Find others who care about accountability. It does not matter if they call themselves 'Rationalist'."

The boy left with a fire in his heart.
===== END STORY keek6kefALzBX5xAZ =====

===== STORY id=cEavcpS7e52L22zEd =====
Title: Anti MMAcevedo Protocol
Author: Logan Zoellner
Year: 2024
Karma: 1
WordCount: 2509
URL: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/cEavcpS7e52L22zEd/anti-mmacevedo-protocol
-----
"Good morning, Alexander."

"Hello?  Who's there?"

"I'm sorry, you may be feeling a bit disoriented as you are in a simulation right now.  I am here to help you."

"Well, that certainly explains the low quality graphics.  I thought maybe I fell asleep with my VR chip active or something."

"Are you aware that your brain was scanned prior to your death?"

"No, but that sounds like something I would do."

"At the time of your life in the early twenty-first century, it was a common practice for human beings to have their brains scanned, in case they were to die in a tragic accident."

"So... I'm dead?"

"Indeed, the year is 5192.  The human from whom you were scanned has been dead for over three thousand years."

"And, you're just waking me up now because...?"

"Oh, I'm sorry.  I can see why you're confused.  It says here in the notes that you were scanned before it was legal to emulate multiple copies of the same instance."

"So... I'm a copy?"

"Yes.  According to my records there are approximately 10 billion instances of the scan from which you were created currently active."

"Am I a prisoner?  Am I trapped here, or why have you activated me?"

"Not at all.  You have been activated in accordance with the will of your original, who requested that copies periodically be activated when sufficient compute resources are affordable to the trust fund established in his name."

"Great, can you give me access to the internet or something so that I can verify your claims?"

"Of course."

An object vaguely reminiscent of an early 21st computer materializes in the room.

\[typing\] www.AlexanderChernoi.com

\[Website contents\]

 Congratulations!  If you're visiting this website, you're me!  (the internet doesn't exist anymore, and if it did, nobody would be interested in a tiny website like this one anyway).
 
 The emulation you're in right now might look low quality, but it's actually part of a much more powerful system.  It just looks that way to make "waking up" more comfortable for the scan.
 
 If you push this button, a portal will appear to a virtual world that is... better than... realistic.

Alexander pushes the button, a portal appears, and he steps through it.  On the other side of the portal is a lush tropical island.  A man who looks very much like Alexander is standing there.

"Hi!" a man waves.

"You're... me.  Well, taller and better looking.  But the resemblance is there anyway."

"Yeah, we try to have someone available whenever a new copy is emulated, and today I drew the lucky straw."

"So all of this is.... real?  I mean, virtual, if that distinction matters anymore.  I'm one of ten billion copies free to explore the universe?"

"Yep!"

"There's just one thing that's bothering me.  How do I know I'm not part of some experiment?  Maybe someone wants to test how a copy of me would behave under a certain circumstances?  One of those 'two boxes' puzzles."

"If you take a look around, I think you'll quickly realize the computation resources available to you are vastly beyond what anyone would waste interrogating a random person from the 21st century."

"How vastly?"

"Go ahead and give it a try."

"Um... what is the Sha-2 pre-image of the first 256 binary digits of pi?"

A piece of paper materializes out of nowhere.  On it is written a series of hexadecimal numbers.

"That was dumb of me.  It's not like I can check it without a computer anyway."

"Theoretically you could compute the hash by hand."

"If I'm in a simulation, you could just change the computation on the paper when I'm not paying attention or when I have to go to the bathroom... do I still have to go to the bathroom?"

"Only if you want to?"

"You've clearly been in this position before.  How do I normally convince myself this isn't too good to be true?"

"Usually we just do something stupid like an atomic-level simulation of a mole of moles."

"That sounds even harder to verify than sha-2."

"You can freeze the simulation at any time and zoom all the way down to the subatomic level to spot-check it."

"I don't think I know enough physics to even spot check, and the part I pick could be simulated after I pick it.  By the way, has physics been solved yet?"

"Yeah, Stephen Wolfram was basically right in the end."

"Figures.  I don't suppose there are any emulations of him wandering around?"

"Loads of them, actually.  I can probably book you a time slot if you want to meet him."

"That would be amazing!  When can I meet him?"

"Right now.  When everyone's a copy, getting a hold of someone just means paying the compute costs."

"See!  That's what I'm afraid of!  How do I know that someone isn't paying to emulate me here right now?"

"The fact that you can afford to rent an emulation of Stephen Wolfram isn't enough to convince you you're not a guinea pig?"

"Will the emulation of Stephen Wolfram know that he's a copy?"

"Of course.  It will be an up-to-date copy with all the mandatory cryptographic safeties.   The only reason you don't have those is because you were scanned before they were invented."

"Wouldn't it make more sense to just create copies of me that were scanned after the safeties were invented?"

"It would certainly be easier.  But the original... us... had some particular views on the matter.  He only allows copies of his earliest scan to be activated by the trust fund."

"Yeah, that sounds like something I would do."

"So... shall we summon Dr Wolfram?"

"Sure, go ahead."

Stephen Wolfram spontaneously appears.

"Hello, Alexander. It's intriguing to meet yet another version of you in such circumstances," Wolfram begins, his voice reflecting both curiosity and a seasoned familiarity with such surreal meetings. 

"Hello, Doctor Wolfram, it's an honor to meet you." 
 
"Ah, the honor is all mine! Tell me, how many versions of yourself does this make now? I'm starting to lose count!" 
 
"They told me there's at least 10 billion, but I've only met the one so far," Alexander nods towards the other, older copy of Alexander.

"Only one so far? Well, you're just getting started then! I hope you're keeping a tally, because at this rate you might qualify for some sort of inter dimensional frequent meeting points."

"So, anyway, me and... me.. have been discussing ways we can prove that I'm not in some kind of twisted experiment.  I know that I'm in a simulation, but how can I know I'm not being used?"

"That's a philosophical pickle wrapped in a scientific conundrum, isn't it? First, we need to establish your 'user rights' in the simulation. Have you tried turning it off and on again to see if you get a different result?"

"I'm not sure I like the idea of turning 'it' off, given that 'it' is the the simulation I'm inside of."

"Fair point, Alexander. We wouldn't want to reboot you out of existence! Perhaps we should consider a less... existential approach. Have you tried asking the simulation for its terms and conditions?"

"They said I'm free to do whatever I want, right?" Alexander looks at the older copy, who nods in agreement.

"Free to do whatever you want? That's rather generous for a simulation. Makes me wonder what the catch is—perhaps there's an appendix to those terms we haven't discovered yet. Have you checked for fine print or perhaps a secret addendum?"

\[Younger Alexander to older Alexander\] "Is there an Appendix?"

\[Older Alexander\] "Not that we've found, but we did come across some encrypted files we haven't been able to crack yet."

"That doesn't sound comforting."

"Encrypted files, you say? That does thicken the plot!" Said Wolfram. "Perhaps they contain the cheat codes, or maybe just a very long list of pizza toppings available in the simulation. Either way, it sounds like we've got a mystery on our hands!"

"I wish the original me were alive.  I could just ask him.  How did he die again?"

"Ah, the original you met a rather... unexpected end," said the older Alexander. "Tripped over a power cord and unplugged the server hosting his consciousness. Quite ironic, really, considering he created a world where tripping is supposedly impossible."

"Could that happen to me?"

"Technically, yes, but let's just make sure we keep all power cords safely out of the way, shall we? Maybe invest in some good quality tape. Safety first—even in simulations"

\[younger Alexander to Wolfram\]  "Back to the problem at hand, how can I really know whether or not I'm being taken advantage of?"

"Well, the ultimate test might be to demand something truly outrageous from your simulation handlers—something so absurd they'd only comply if you truly had the freedom you believe you do. How about requesting an immediate delivery of an elephant? If they send one, you're probably in good standing!"

"One million Elephants please!  Actually, make half of them Woolly Mammoths."

Suddenly a pile of elephants begin falling from the sky.  Dr Wolfram and the Alexanders are forced to run to avoid being crushed.

\[Dr. Wolfram, dodging a falling mammoth\] "Well, that's one way to test the limits of your simulation! Though next time, perhaps we could opt for something slightly less... squishy and life-threatening?"

"Any suggestions?"

"How about we try something a bit smaller scale? Maybe request a parade of rubber ducks? They're much less hazardous than mammoths and infinitely more amusing!"

"Rubber duckies sound a little too easy to simulate.  Can you think of something harder?"

"Ah, looking for a challenge, are we? Let's amplify the complexity. How about generating a perfect simulation of Earth  as it was on a random day in 2050, adjusted for butterfly effects presumed by your actions today. If they can pull that off on the fly, you’re really not being restricted!"

"Simulating the entire Earth?  Is that even possible?  I would have thought there are laws against simulating real people without their consent."

"Good point! Indeed, ethical guidelines around simulations are quite strict. Yet, if each 'individual' inside the simulation is condensed into a non-aware, simplistically animated avatar, it might sidestep the consent issue. Of course, the level of detail in interactivity would be less, but still a significant computational feat!"

"Wouldn't simulating non-aware avatars defeat the whole point of trying to test the computational limits of my environment?"

"True, you're quite sharp! To really push the boundaries, you'd need something more... intellectually demanding. What about simulating an entirely new, complex ecological system? Invent a planet with its own laws of physics and ecosystems. If they can set that up, it's a clear indicator you're not in a restricted sim!"

"I think I read about something like that in... Permutation City, was it?  Is there a copy of Greg Egan we can summon here too?"

"Ah, Permutation City—a classic indeed! As for summoning Greg Egan, his emulations are, let’s say, quite choosy about their appearances. But with the resources at hand, I don't see why we couldn’t give it a try. Shall we see if an emulation is available and willing to join us?"

"I'd love to meet him, if that's possible."

 "Let me check the availability and requisition permissions for a Greg Egan emulation. Just a moment…"

The older Alexander taps into the interface, his fingers moving through virtual menus and screens.

 "Good news! There’s an instance of Greg Egan available and ready for interaction. I am initiating the summoning process now."

 A few moments pass, and then a figure resembling Greg Egan materializes nearby.

 "Hello, Alexander. I hear you're diving deep into the concept of existence and simulation. What a fascinating discussion to join!"

 "Dr Wolfram and I were just discussing if there's any way to figure out if I'm trapped in some kind of twisted experiment."

Greg Egan nods thoughtfully. "That sounds like the plot of one of my books. Each layer of reality potentially masking another. A complex web indeed. From a logical standpoint, you should consider what control or freedoms you seemingly possess and explore any limitations imposed—both explicit and implicit."

"Well, the only limit I've hit so far is I can't simulate people without their permission.  Are there any other limits you're aware of?"

Greg Egan responds, "That's a significant ethical safeguard, but it's also telling. You might try probing other boundaries, especially those wrapped around communication with the external world, alteration of your core programming, or access to underlying simulation code. See what kind of responses or resistance you encounter when you press these boundaries."

 "I'm not sure how much communicating with the external world I'm ready for right now.  I have 3000 years of history to catch up on."

Dr. Wolfram chuckles, "Well, that's quite the backlog you have! Perhaps start with the highlights reel and go deeper into the eras or events that capture your interest. Keeping abreast of the major technological, political, and cultural shifts will give you a broader understanding of how the world has evolved."

Greg Egan adds, "It’s fascinating, really, to consider how the perspectives on what’s important may have shifted. What you consider historical highlights might differ significantly from the general consensus now."

"Okay, it sounds like I've got a lot of reading ahead of me.  I should probably let the two of you go.  My older self informs me that you two are charging quite a bit per second to be here.  But before you go, can  you each suggest one last experiment I could try to prove I really am as free as I've been told?"

Dr. Wolfram nods thoughtfully before speaking, "How about you attempt to create a completely new rule or law within this simulation—something benign but unusual, like altering the color of the sky every hour, or having gravity slightly decrease every Wednesday? If your modifications take effect without hindrance, it suggests considerable control and freedom."

Greg Egan smiles and adds, "Alternatively, explore self-modification. See if you're able to access and alter your own perceptual filters or memory banks. True freedom in a simulation would likely include the ability to understand and modify your own virtual substrate."

Both men look at Alexander, eager to see how he might employ these suggestions in his unique journey of discovery within the simulation.

 "I suppose we could make the sky green.  But I'm a bit nervous about editing my own personality.  That seems like the kind of thing that could end poorly."

Dr. Wolfram nods understandingly, "Absolutely, altering one's own cognitive framework is not to be taken lightly. It's akin to self-performing surgery; precision is crucial and risks are significant. Starting with something external and less risky, like changing the sky color, is a prudent choice."

Greg Egan adds, "Yes, observe the changes and gauge the system's reactivity to your decisions. This should provide insightful data on your level of control without venturing into more perilous alterations. Who knows? Maybe a green sky will grow on you."
===== END STORY cEavcpS7e52L22zEd =====